{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset204 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # New normals #\
\
The radical epistemology captured in the mantra "Nothing about us without us" is a recurring theme that has shaped the advocacy across multiple struggles within the disability rights movement. In the past few decades, a variety of subcultures within the disability rights movement have spawned a range of responses to the credibility crisis, challenging the underlying assumptions of the externally imposed "us"es.  These responses vary in their acceptance of the language used by medical experts to describe and categorize the group, and often involve contestation over labels, as well as treatment. In contrast to the ACTUP activists, disability rights activists question the medical model of disability, challenging frameworks which define disability as an "impairment" and which glorify "normal". Throughout these sites of contestation we witness the value of democratic meaning making as these groups seek to assert their identify in their own terms. This dynamic is most visible in the feedback loop that flows from the second, participatory "us" back to the first, externally imposed "us", as the group reclaims the power to name themselves and their concerns, prioritizing these concerns according to their own value structures.  \
\
## Listening to the Deaf ##\
\
In 1972, James Woodward, a professor of sociolinguistics and the co-director of the Centre for Sign Linguistics and Deaf Studies at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, introduced the distinction between deaf and Deaf, "to use the lowercase deaf when referring to the audiological condition of not hearing, and the uppercase Deaf when referring to a particular group of deaf people who share a language \'96 ASL and a culture.\'94 (1983).  Deaf culture represents a rich history and tradition, with distinct languages, norms and values, and Woodward's distinction was widely adopted within Deaf communities. In 1990, Paddy Ladd coined the term Deafhood in an attempt to:\
\
>define the existential state of Deaf 'being-in-the-world'. Hitherto, the medical term 'deafness' was used to subsume that experience within the larger category of 'hearing-impaired'... so the true nature of Deaf collective experience was rendered invisible. Deafhood is not seen as a finite state, but as a process by which Deaf individuals come to actualize their Deaf identity..."  (2003, p. ) \
\
Many in the Deaf community have fiercely defended their culture, most famously in the controversy surrounding cochlear implants (Tucker, 1998). The use of cochlear implants, especially in prelingual children, has been construed as an existential threat to the Deaf community, who question the effectiveness and morality of this invasive treatment, especially since the procedure is performed on children who are incapable of informed consent. Deaf activists vigorously deny the pathologizing of their condition, arguing that deafness is a difference not a deficiency. Preventing children from participating in Deaf culture deprives them of their agency, and is systematically destroying Deaf culture. People without hearing impairments or who lost their hearing later in life are often surprised to encounter these perspectives, confident in their belief that hearing impairment is a deficiency. They are largely unfamiliar with the richness of Deaf culture, and are unaware that people are struggling to preserve it. Deaf advocacy demonstrates the importance of listening to a diversity voices before rushing to judgement around other people's experiences.\
  \
## Anything but Neurotypical  ##\
\
Ari Ne'eman is the founder of the Autism Self Advocacy Network (ASAN), a group founded in 2006 that believes that autism is a neurological difference, not a disease that needs to be cured. Their website states that "ASAN was started by autistic adults who were unhappy with the prevailing public dialogue on autism, believing that the autism world would be better served by ending the misguided search for a "cure" and focusing on empowering and supporting autistic people and all people with disabilities to live the lives we wanted." Ne'eman was diagnosed with Aspergers syndrome as a child and was frustrated that his schooling seemed focused on "normalizing" his behavior, not helping him thrive on his own terms (Hall, 2009). In 2009 he was appointed by President Obama to serve on the National Council on Disability, which makes recommendations to the president and Congress on disability issues (
\f1\fs24 Diament, 2010)
\f0\fs28 . \
ASAN uses the term "neourodiversity" to describe people on the autism spectrum. They call "normal" people "neurotypical" and resist attempts to pathologize autistic behaviors. Similar to Deaf activism, ASAN emphasizes difference instead of a normative deficiency, and advocate for acceptance of neurodiversity instead of forcing all of human experience into a rigid mold. Unlike many mental health activists, ASAN embraces the neuro-biological causes of their differences, and are not threatened by a reductionist account of their condition. ASAN faces criticism for minimizing the suffering of more extreme autistic cases, characterized by self-harm and an inability to take care of their own basic needs. However, their advocacy is another example of the growing trend of advocating for diverse perspectives and respecting the value of lived experiences.   \
\
 ## Diss this ##\
\
The passage of the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990 extended the anti-discrimination protections of the 1964 Civil Rights act to America's disabled. The academic field of Disability Studies emerged in the 1980s, and the Society for Disability studies was formed in 1986. Disability studies \
\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disability_studies"}}{\fldrslt https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disability_studies}}\
 \
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.madnessradio.net/madness-radio-autism-self-advocacy-ari-neeman/"}}{\fldrslt http://www.madnessradio.net/madness-radio-autism-self-advocacy-ari-neeman/}}\
Neorodiversity. Neurotypical. \
\
\
HIV was universally considered a scourge, and no one claimed that an HIV diagnosis represented an alternative lifestyle, as with other disability \
}