{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##A Pot Luck Parable##\
\
White began talking, adopting the posture and tone of a university lecturer. His starting point was very abstract, as he laid out a thought experiment depicting the extreme wealth inequality in the global economy. White continued to explain the severity of wealth disparity and extreme poverty, without explicitly connecting these issues to mental health or psychiatry. He asked the room to imagine one hundred people sitting around a table having dinner representing the entire population of the world. "so 100 plates of dinner of the foods of the world is brought in and 56 of those dinners are placed beside this one man. One is placed in front of him, the next 39 get one dinner each, and the remaining 60 get a saucer about 4-inches in diameter with one spoonful of rice." White explained two effects caused by this inequality. The physical effects of malnourishment leading to disease and death, and the emotional effects of shame and humiliation, elicited when people "are looked down upon, seen as not worthy of being spoken to, that their plight is their fault, that they are irresponsible lazy, all the things that describe poor people often."\
\
When I spoke to group participants after the meeting I confirmed that most were expecting a more interactive format, and I watched as many of the activists become visibly restless as the lecture continued. After about 10 minutes into White's lecture, David Oaks, who was noticeably frustrated by the format and substance of the meeting, interjected:\
\
>Duncan - can I put an asterisk in here? Because, obviously this end of the table is pretty distressed. They're on Prozac, Zoloft, Paxil, neuroleptics\'85 very, very heavily drugged by the psych industry\'85. Suppose I was a 1-percenter here, and I announced that\'85 I'm gonna hold a radical caucus that doesn't invite in the people from the most disempowered part. This meeting should be majority mental health consumer and psych survivor. The most radical thing\'85 you guys could do as a radical caucus is to invite those people down from the other end of the table into the 1%-er and be allies, and work together and unite.\
\
White appeared slightly flustered by the interruption of his thought experiment and tried to reassure Oaks that he was planning to get to the psychiatric interventions later. Oaks responded, "I think we just did." and started to explain that Cohen had appointed him the meeting leader when he walked in. Something about the exchange trigged Oaks to stand up and sing:\
\
>_Die Gedanken Sind Frei\'97my thoughts freely flower,_\\newline\
_Die Gedanken Sind Frei\'97my thoughts give me power,_\\newline\
_No scholar can map them, no hunter can trap them,_\\newline\
_No one can deny, [yells and pounds]_\\newline\
_Die Gedanken [pound pound] Sind Frei._\\newline\
_I think as I please, and this gives me pleasure,_\\newline\
_my conscience decrees, this right I must treasure._\\newline\
_My thoughts will not cater to duke or dictator,_\\newline\
_no one can deny, Die Gedanken Sind Frei\'85_\\newline\
_And if tyrants take me\'97yes, you down there at the end of the table\'97_\\newline\
_if tyrants take our people and throw them in prison,_\\newline\
_our thoughts will burst free, like blossoms in season,_\\newline\
_foundations will crumble and structures will tumble,_\\newline\
_and free folk will cry: Die Gedanken Sind Frei!_\\newline\
_And that means, our thoughts are free. They can't be controlled._\
\
Several people at the meeting appeared disturbed by Oaks' electric performance. I overheard a psychiatrist sitting next to me crack a snarky joke to his neighbor that Oaks must have forgotten to take his Lithium that morning. Oaks continued:\
\
>You can't stop what I'm doing right here. Oppressed people are gonna be rising up\'85 Please, if you are our allies, invite us in. You guys are professionals in emotions, deal with the anger of traumatized people\'85 invite in the mental health consumers, invite in the psychiatric survivors... read about how a bunch of psych survivors were in front of the APA protesting. We had a few allies, but not enough\'85 [puts on red clown nose] I am here for Patch Adams\'85 he screens people for normality, and we are screening you for normality right now\'85 Every single one of us is unique, different, unusual.... we are begging you guys to be our allies in the one-percent, cause you're one-percenters, like it or not. We are asking you to be a part of a non-violent revolution. No more reform at the APA\'85 We've tried dialog. Help us with civil disobedience. With protest, with activism. Be our real allies.\
\
Oaks' performance was seen by as counterproductive by some, and heroic by others. The intensity of the protesters' emotions was visible over the weekend, and the incongruity with the energy of the radical caucus was palpable. It is difficult to judge if Oaks' outburst was calculated or unrestrained. He was genuinely frustrated by the lack of urgency he perceived within the Radical Caucus, and especially by their tone deafness to the needs of the constituency he was representing. He also seemed to be driven by a need to perform as a leader in front of the activists present in the room. Ultimately, the mismatch in the tenor of the protests and the staid decorum of the Radical Caucus proved difficult to reconcile. The meeting will undoubtedly be remembered by all of the attendees, and it is unclear how a gentler intervention would have changed the course of the conversation.\
\
I spoke to Oaks later that night and he insisted his spectacle was spontaneous and was not premeditated. For years, Oaks has performed a routine at protests that involves dressing up in a white lab coat, donning a red clown nose and "scanning" people for normal using a rubber chicken. It is plausible that he happened to have his red nose with him during the meeting, from an action earlier that day. "Die Gedanken Sind Frei" is a traditional protest song, whose lyrics first appeared in pamphlets in the beginning of the 19\\textsuperscript\{th\} century. The song was taken up by anti-Nazi resistance movements, and in the 20\\textsuperscript\{th\} century has been associated with groups opposing fascism (Melon, 2007). Oaks has sung this song in speeches before, and his selection of this song represents his defiance of the "thought policing" that characterizes the worst of psychiatry, and an accusation that equates psychiatric oppression with historical fascism. He implores the doctors in the room, who are "professionals in emotion" to "deal with the anger of traumatized people". This plea, while not quite apologetic, surfaced the traumatic scars and raw emotions that must be processed and patiently tolerated for meaningful dialogue to proceed.\
\
White accepted the outburst in stride, responding "I think, I appreciate your, I respect your passion with which you spoke, and I think there is actually quite a bit of common ground\'85 I'll speak for myself, that I've been trying to think for myself outside of the bounds of, conventional bounds of psychiatry, which is quite difficult. I think you brought in a justified sense of passion which is absolutely needed." White then returned to the thought experiment he was explaining before the interruption. He invoked Marx and Gramsci, and touched on psychiatry's role in defining social reality.\
\
After another five full minutes of exposition, Oaks interrupted him again, asking\'97when will the workshop part of the meeting begin? White ignored the interruption and expounded on the idea that therapists reinforce the existing order, and they often "[discount] the social nature of your injury" and "turn the inequalities of the existing order into a series of personal problems." He emphasized that changing individual practice is important, but doesn't change the system.\
\
As White wrapped up his thought experiment, Oaks again jumped in, imploring him to go around the room and ask people to introduce themselves. White replied that he would let Cohen decide what to do next and completed his lecture, a full 30 minutes into the meeting. Cohen took a moment to plug the _Liberatory Psychiatry_ (2008) anthology he co-edited, and then tried to move the conversation to a discussion. Cohen agreed not to talk anymore and he asked Oaks not to talk for a while, at which point Oaks once again requested that people introduce themselves. "It's like one of the most radical things you can do. Not to break domination, by having one, one individual run the meeting. Just go around and quickly say your names and introduce yourselves and say hi." Cohen was concerned that introductions would take too much time, but finally relented and the participants introduced themselves.\
}