{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Participatory Paradoxes#\
\
Over the past decade the politics and rhetoric of activists organizing around mental health issues have begun to shift dramatically. These shifts have been simultaneously subtle and stark. Crucially, some elements of the movement have moved away from a purely oppositional, head-butting critique of the psychiatric-pharmaceutical alliance, and their demands have begun to focus on questions of voice. In the tradition of the disability rights movement, this new generation of the mad resistance has taken up the cry "Nothing about us without us". James Charlton cataloged the centrality of this phrase to disability rights in his book _Nothing About Us Without Us: Disability Oppression and Empowerment_ (1998). Charlton first heard the expression invoked by leaders of the South African disabled people's group in 1993, who claimed to have heard it used earlier at an Eastern European international disability rights conference (p. 2). Two years later he saw a front page headline in the Mexico City daily about thousands of landless peasants marching under the banner "_Nunca Mas Sin Nosotros_" (Never Again Without Us), and adopted "Nothing about us without us" as the working title of his book.\
\
Chalrton quotes Ed Roberts, a leader of the international disability rights movement"If we have learned one thing from the civil rights movement in the U.S., it's that when others speak for you, you lose" (Driedger 1989:28), and traces the impulse behind the expression "Nothing about us without us" to the civil rights era, embodied in works such as _Our Bodies, Ourselves: A book by and for women_ (Boston Women's Health Book Collective, 1973), and the widely used civil rights slogan "Power to the People".\
\
On the surface the proposition "Nothing about us without us" seems like a timid assertion, easy to satisfy. However, it has proven to be one of the most radical demands the movement can make. It has radical implications for the ways in which human conditions are investigated and addressed. It also challenges the binary distinction between objectivity and subjectivity, and calls into question the possibly of objective knowledge devoid of context.\
\
Mad folk have traditionally occupied a paradoxical place in public discourse. By definition they are branded "irrational" and are categorically precluded from having a voice in rational public debate. In an age when people of all sorts insist that their understandings of themselves and their problems matter, how can this constituency find their voices, sustain them, and make them persuasive? Who will accept their legitimacy and listen? This problematic has shaped mental health activism throughout its history, and this emerging wave of mad resistance has begun to confront this impasse directly.\
\
In the first decade of the 21\\textsuperscript\{st\} century, mad activists reinvented psychiatric resistance with a politics that deeply resonated with trends in participatory culture and was supported by a new generation of communications technologies. The Icarus Project, a leading organization at the forefront of this shift, developed hybrid models of peer-support and direct action that were accelerated and amplified by new communicative possibilities. They mobilized around free and open-source communications platforms, and constructed architectures of participation that supported their existing commitments to access, advocacy, transparency, expression, engagement, and community building.\
\
Challenging psychiatric methods and paradigms, questioning the validity of pharmaceutical research, and protesting the political processes that shape mental health policy is nothing new. Activists have struggled for decades (Crossley, 2006), if not centuries (Foucault, 1965; Whitaker, 2003), to resist the imposition of the category of mental illness for the maintenance of hierarchical societies. Even according to historians who contest Foucault's simplistic account of madness in the Middle Ages, as presented in _Madness and Civilization_ (1965), the historical role of mad folk as society's outsiders subjected to the powerful, remains obvious. Erik Midelfort's _A History of Madness in Sixteenth-Century Germany_ emphasizes the real trauma and suffering exhibited by the mad, and the benevolent care afforded them in hospitals modeled on monasteries (Midelfort, 2000). His argument with Foucault over historical specifics does not undermine the general shape of Foucault's argument, namely the identification of "power" as the mechanism which determines who's mad, and who's sane, even if Foucault's portrayal of the period turns out to be a caricature. Though some of the mad surely suffered, some of those accused of demonic possession and witchcraft were surely undeserving victims. Foucault also recommends studying sites of resistance to better comprehend the machinery and contours of power, a strategy I adopt in this dissertation.\
\
In the modern period, cultural theorists such as Brad Lewis and Jonathan Metzl have exposed the entrenched ideological and commercial interests that aggressively promote the hegemonic narratives that flatten minds into brains and reduce feelings to chemical reactions (Lewis, 2006; Metzl, 2010). In the 1990s, a wave of psychiatric resistance first self-identified as the "Mad Pride" movement emerged, advancing a more nuanced critique of mainstream perspectives on mental illness than earlier generations of anti-psychiatry activists and the consumer/survivor/ex-patient (c/s/x) movements (Coleman, 2008; Morrison, 2005; Crossley, 2006). This emergence marked a break from the orthodox psychiatric survivor movement that came before them.\
\
Like the gay/queer pride movement, whose name and politics directly inspired them, mad pride activists focused more on identity politics than human rights discourses. As the second wave feminists argued, "the personal is political", and this reframing of the issues opened up powerful new avenues of critique (Hanisch, 1969). This new wave of criticism did not entail any particular dogma around hospitalization, medication, or labels, but was rooted in challenging authority and the means by which knowledge is produced (DuBrul, 2012). What has opened up as a result is a whole field of linguistic contestation. The term "mad pride" is problematic, embraced by some and rejected by others in the movement it for reasons we will explore in Chapter 5. Currently, there is no recognized term identified with the new wing of the movement, aside from the generic "radical mental health" movement.\
\
The radical epistemology captured in the mantra "Nothing about us without us", succinctly represents this unnamed transformative shift (Charlton, 1998). Instead of simply resisting forced drugging and electroshock therapy, this new wave of mad resistance affirms an epistemology that diverges from the conventional medical model. They embrace liberation politics and stages direct actions that attempt to transform the language used to describe the mentally ill. They aspire to develop languages of compassion, celebrate their "dangerous gifts" through creative expression, and facilitate safe spaces for people to share their experiences and subjective narratives. Building on the work of earlier generations of activists who advocated for individual treatment choices and informed consent (Oaks, 2006), they encourage active participation in their healing communities, and insist that their voices and stories be heard and respected alongside those of experts and professionals.\
\
The trope of patient empowerment was forced onto the mainstream agenda through the largely successful activism of the international direct action group, AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP)(Halperin, 1995; Gould, 2009). In the early 80s, when the scourge of AIDS erupted in the United States, the government and pharmaceutical corporations were negligent in responding to the urgent needs of the afflicted. ACT UP formed to demand patient empowerment, and contingents within the group began conducting scientific research, drafting policies and protocols, and ultimately became leading experts on their own condition. They formed their own support groups, pooled their resources to collectively purchase experimental drugs that were not yet approved in the US, and staged vivid protests and direct actions, such as die-ins and the creation of alternative sexual education material. While ACT UP demanded new attention, research and drugs from pharmaceutical industry, and mental health activists are not especially interested in the development of new pharmaceuticals---one might say that they are demanding _less_ attention---there are interesting parallels in the underlying ideology of their demands.\
\
The transformational shift in this emerging wave of resistance can be construed as a shift from advocating for a particular ontology to advocating for a new epistemology. More than a discursive face-off disputing the nature of reality, the disagreement focuses on the question of how to approach controversies and establish consensus. For example, many anti-psychiatrists and psychiatric survivors in the 1970s have argued (and still continue to argue) that there is no such thing as mental illness. I argue that the newly emerging wave of mad resistance operates on a different plane. It is more concerned with ensuring that all of the relevant stakeholders have seats at the tables of power, where their voices can be included in the production of psychiatric knowledge. First and foremost is the primacy of their own voices in the understanding of their situation and the co-creation of their stories. Crucially, their insistence on co-constructing their own identities and narratives underlies their platforms, critiques, and actions.\
\
\
\
}