\chapter{Conclusion: Mad Horizons}\label{chapter-six}

\cleanchapterquote{We're all mad here.}{Cheshire Cat}{Alice in Wonderland} 

My personal engagement with The Icarus Project began in Winter 2005 when I encountered a journalism student's article in the Columbia News Service entitled "A new movement views bipolar disorder as a dangerous gift" (Itzenson, 2005). Itzenson's article spotlighted The Icarus Project, and characterized the project as pioneering a new movement, more nuanced and ambiguous than their predecessors. There is a history of mental illness and emotional distress in my family, and I responded to the article by directly emailing Sascha DuBrul, the project's co-founder and sharing some of my own writing on creativity and madness. Throughout my studies the theme of madness surfaced in contexts such as explaining consciousness, understanding creativity and interpreting ancient and religious texts. DuBrul replied enthusiastically to an essay I sent him about prophecy, creativity and madness and we began corresponding (Bossewitch, 1995). In December 2005 I attended my first organizing meeting, and was soon consulting with other volunteers on how the project could improve its communications strategy and technical infrastructure. Through these encounters I began to learn more about the wider c/s/x movement, it's history, politics and ideology.

During this time I was working as a full-time software developer and attending Teachers College in the Communications and Education program. I was studying critical information studies with an emphasis on privacy, transparency and surveillance. In the Fall of 2006 I became embroiled in an incident that would later form the basis of my Masters thesis, and was also a pivotal turning point in the direction of my academic focus. The scene I entered began in a Federal District courtroom where the pharmaceutical corporation Eli Lilly was defending itself from a class action lawsuit alleging the harmful side-effects of their multi-billion dollar blockbuster drug Zyprexa (Olanzepine), an atypical anti-psychotic approved for the treatment of schizophrenia. A witness for the plaintiffs decided to leak thousands of incriminating documents that were enjoined, sealed by the judge to expedite discovery. The documents implicated Lilly in knowingly downplaying the side effects of Zyprexa. These internal memos showed that Lilly scientists and executives had known for over a decade that Zyprexa causes diabetes, and not merely obesity as the class action suit alleged. The memos also showed that Lilly had actively marketed Zyprexa "off-label", and their salespeople had created an internal marketing campiang, code-named "viva zyprexa", designed to push the powerful drug on children with behavioral disorders and seniors with dementia.

I wrote a more complete account of the actions that followed the leaks of these memos in an article published in re-public magazine, "The ZyprexaKills campaign: Peer production and the frontiers of radical pedagogy." (Bossewitch, 2007) In summary, essential findings from the memos were published by the New York Times in a series of front-page investigative stories. Subsequently, a group of activists began analyzing the primary sources and were soon defending their First Amendment rights against a legal action instigated by Eli Lilly. Utilizing an array of legal instruments, Lilly's lawyers attacked the digital sites where activists were analyzing the documents, and attempted to shut down their efforts. The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), a non-profit impact law firm dedicated to defending digital civil rights, agreed to represent the activists against the suppression of their speech under the "prior restraint" provision of the First Amendment.

#Jonah Doe#

In January 2007 I personally became a client of the EFF and agreed to have them represent me against Lilly and defend my right to speak. The circumstances of this case converged around my intellectual and activist passions. At this point in my life I was an active supporter of the EFF, and active in the "free culture" movement, a direct descendant of the free speech movement and was becoming more engaged in psychiatric resistance. As a part of this action I also chose to exercise my First Amendment right to litigate anonymously, and the EFF protected my identity by referring to me throughout the case as "John Doe". At the time I was concerned about the attention and coverage the case might generate, especially since I did not know how the case would unfold. To this day I am relieved that not a single court briefing or newspaper article about the case bears my name, and internet searches for me are not dominated by results detailing my involvement in a provocative First Amendment action around an anti-psychotic. Stigma continues to surround activism and mental health issues, and I felt it was important to exert whatever control I could manage over my public reputation. I am disclosing my identity for the first time now since almost a decade has passed, and this experience was pivotal and transformative. My direct involvement in this case helped set the course for this entire project.

The six weeks I spent as a client of the EFF were among the most harrowing of my life. Since the entire action was a sidebar in the larger class-action suit there were no formal charges filed against me. However, the presiding judge had the power to hold me in criminal contempt of court if he determined I had knowingly conspired to violate his injunction, a ruling that could have resulted in large fines and/or incarceration. Though I knew I was innocent, anything can happen in open court, and each day brought new developments and court briefs that might affect the outcome of my case. I was riveted by the proceedings, and devoured every document as they appeared. My reaction to Lilly's court briefs was often a mixture of frustration, horror, indignation and disbelief. I observed Lilly's lawyers framing and interpreting the facts in ways that distorted reality. They alleged conspiracies where none existed, ascribed nefarious motives without supporting evidence for these insinuations, and repeatedly tried to unmask my anonymous standing. The experience provided me with a crash course on First Amendment law as well as powerful case study on activist communications strategies and how a stories travel through the media ecosystem.

A professional investigative journalist on the mental health beat became a close confidant, and we corresponded daily about developments in the case and the contents of the ZyprexaKills memos. My hunger for news surrounding the case was insatiable and I started researching and following news across the entire pharmaceutical industry. I learned about corruption and malfeasance across the sector, and that Lilly's crimes were typical, not exceptional. I learned about the toxic side-effects of the entire class of anti-psychotics, even the new generation of so-called "atypical" anti-psychotics. Most importantly, I learned what it was like for a journalist to cover a beat, and the essential function that professional journalists serve in making sense of complex narratives. By the time the judge issued his ruling I had gained a fresh understanding for how this domain constituted a legitimate field of academic research, and how urgent, important and neglected this research is.

#Corrective Lenses#

These experiences led me to view the work of the Icarus Project in a fresh light. The ZyprexaKills campaign opened my eyes to the changing landscape of mental health treatment, and I became more conscious of the corruption and largely unchecked power of the pharmaceutical industry alongside their peculiar alliance with psychiatry. This alliance is one of the factors standing in the way of involving patients in knowledge making, and psychiatrists, journalists, and patients all recognize the industry's profit-driven motives. I spotlighted the dramatic expansion of psychiatric-pharmaceutical influence earlier in Chapter 2, which focused on the growth of the pediatric bipolar diagnosis. And, as the psychiatric context shifted and evolved, so did the language of resistance.

As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, my initial exposure to The Icarus Project was via an article entitled "A new movement views bipolar disorder as a dangerous gift." The Icarus Project membership tended to be young and well-educated, though many were unaware of the history of psychiatric resistance in the 20th century before joining the project. With their openness to psychiatric medications and diagnoses, Icaristas believed they were breaking with the past, and viewed their movement as innovative and fresh. They described themselves in these terms, and this narrative was often represented in the mainstream press, in publications such as the _New York Times,_ (Glaser, 2008; Heffernan, 2010) _Newsweek_, (Quart, 2009) and _O, The Oprah Magazine_. (Quart, 2013)

When I began this project I also viewed The Icarus Project through this lens, as a distinctly new voice with a fresh message that broke from the ideas of R.D. Laing, Thomas Szasz and Peter Breggin, who all demonized psychiatry, and to varying degrees, denied the existence of mental illness and any value in psychiatric medications. I started this project with the belief that The Icarus Project represented the cutting edge of the movement, and in many important respects I still believe this is the case. My research and analysis has focused on trying to understand how the project is different---What did the cacophonous voices of the membership express over the past decade? In what ways is this message different than previous generations of the c/s/x movement?

Through my interactions with the community over the years I have learned that members of Icarus generally share inclusive attitudes and a tolerance for diversity, but they don't explicitly share consistent justifications for their positions or beliefs. The analysis of the underlying justifications that I advance in this dissertation is under-theorized within the community itself. Positions are often justified based on intuitions and gut feelings and members of the community sometime find it difficult to represent their beliefs and persuade others to take their perspectives seriously. What seems to be missing is a framework that grounds these critiques, a concise articulation of the commonalities among this collection of sprawling perspectives and expressions.

Throughout this dissertation I have emphasized the importance of a plurality of voices in the construction of psycho-social knowledge, and the power of the mantra "nothing about us without us" that is implicit in the language and advocacy of The Icarus Project. Icaristas' behaviors embody participatory ethics, but this emphasis is partially mine, as this rhetorical formulation has not been widely and crisply articulated in the movement's public communications. This formulation is implied, but not uniformly articulated, as the movement is currently in the process of clarifying and refining its own message. The absence of clarity suggests an important direction for the movement, which would be greatly strengthened by a sharper framing and vision. My analysis is grounded on years of conversations and interactions as well as on the soup of sentiments present in the Icarus Project's voluminous communications, especially when contrasted with the movement's historical predecessors.

My interpretive stance is an attempt to make sense of multiple expressions demanding an inclusive role in the production of knowledge and policy. Sometimes the activist's expressions imply this demand sometimes they make it explicitly. A powerful argument motives their story-telling, what I have called "narrative advocacy", and crystalizing this argument is the next step in this movement's growth. This argument's novelty is evident in the popular misconception that all resistance to psychiatry rejects the existence of mental illness, and throughout this project I encountered surprise and enthusiasm around an alternative perspective. Beyond narrative advocacy, the movement has the opportunity to learn from ACT-UP and begin participating directly in the production of scientific research that bears on their condition. With notable exceptions, such as Kay Jamison (1996), researchers who self-identify as mad have been historically scarce. A new generation of academic social scientists, including Emily Martin (2007), Nev Jones, and Timothy Kelley (2015) are actively contributing to our understanding of madness from the perspective of people who have received psychiatric diagnoses and treatment, and are providing crucial bridges between academia and activism.

The movement's messaging has an opportunity to align itself with the messaging of other oppressed groups by framing their objections around the sins of being excluded from the production of knowledge and policy that directly affects them. Inclusion is shorthand for the kinds of ideas that this participation will incorporate, and the examples that follow below suggest how this participation might alter perspectives, training and support.

#Exploratory Salvos#

A vivid way to illustrate the generative and explanatory power of this rhetorical frame is by considering a series of recent developments and analyzing them though this lens. These examples are drawn from ongoing conversations on the future of mental health, and represent different vectors of attack that the mainstream psychiatric establishment is facing.

##MADLOVE: A Designer Asylum##

>_Is it possible to go mad in a positive way? How would you create a safe place in which to do so? If you designed your own asylum, what would it look like?_

These are the questions motivating "MADLOVE: A Designer Asylum", an innovative art project-cum-intervention that previewed in Liverpool, England in the Spring of 2015. The project is compelling since it demonstrates an act of resistance that does not demonize psychiatry or condemn asylums outright. Rather, it suggests a middle ground for critiquing the asylum precisely along the lines I argue the movement is advancing---by listening to the voices of the people on the receiving end of the asylum's services

The installation was featured as a part of an exhibit entitled "Group Therapy: Mental Distress in a Digital Age" and was on display from March 5, 2105 through May 17, 2015. James Leadbitter, aka "The Vacuum Cleaner" was the 34 year-old lead designer who describes himself as an "art and activism collective of one". (Leadbiter, 2015) Leadbitter's work has appeared at the Tate Modern and Chicago's Museum of Contemporary Art, and he has struggled with his mental health most of his adult life. He has been institutionalized in the UK multiple times, including for almost a year when he was 18.(Taylor, 2015) He experienced institutionalization as punishing rather than loving, more like a prison than a hospital. He actively wonders how we can transform our support for people undergoing mental distress and create beautiful, enticing and supportive environments for their recovery.

Leadbitter collaborated with Hannah Hull, the show's producer who is currently a doctoral candidate at Goldsmisths at the Institute for Creative and Cultural Enterprise. Hull also consults on "creative practices for social change" and describes herself as a "situation-specific artist" who creates "social sculpture and political interventions".(Hull, 2015) The Foundation for Art and Creative Technology (FACT) commissioned the project with support from the British Psychological Association in collaboration with the Welcome Trust foundation.

The installation that previewed at FACT was preceded by a series of workshops throughout the Fall of 2014. Leadbitter and Hull conducted workshops around the UK that brought together mental health professionals, artists, academics, designers and particularly people with lived experience in the mental health system. Over 300 people participated in these workshops and their contributions were translated into design principles and the final installation. Participants were prompted to imagine happiness, health and wellness across a spectrum of sensory input. How does good mental health taste, smell, sound, touch, look? They explored what "objects, sounds, smells, colors, shapes, food, facilities and activities we need to create safety around 'madness'?"(Taylor, 2015)

Participants dreamed of an asylum where there were no corridors, of walls that could change color, of a Library with books floor to ceiling and DVDs filed under 'Happy Ending' and 'Sad Ending', where there was a Trampoline Room, a Tree House, a Smash Room, all laid out in a building set near a river close to a forest, where there were no passive-aggressive signs and the emphasis was on meditation, not medication. (O'Donoghue , 2014)

The workshops were well facilitated, and the facilitators avoided most conflict by listening to all participants, and filtering out some suggestions in their artistic translation. Not all of the workshops were published online, and it is unclear if how the groups handled disruptions, or how prevalent disagreements were in this process. The asylum they designed has also never been field tested, and the group avoided some of the harder questions of what kinds of asylum policies would accompany their architecture. Under what, if any, circumstances would patients be forcibly separated, medicated or isolated? What rules would govern intake and discharge? These policies are as important as architecture in governing a patient's asylum experience.

Some of the participant's visions are reminiscent of a children's playground, but they also presented nuanced views of privacy zones, ranging from private (with the patient in control of their seclusion) to semi-private to a bird's eye view of the ward. There was an emphasis on nature---the smell of the ocean, the sounds of birds and laughter, views of trees and flowers---as well as the surreal. A young man in Birmingham remarked: "All I want is a room with Fabergé eggs and a hammer."

Leadbitter and Hull contrasted the participants' responses with the stark reality of institutional design. Its utilitarian furniture, drab colors and prison-like aesthetic reinforced distress and misery. Promotional materials for mental hospitals often feature bucolic settings, but in Leadbitter's experience there was "No green landscape. No rainbow. No butterfly.", as featured on their brochures.

The final art installation was a cross between a Dr. Seuss book and Salvador Dali's house. It features a ceiling strung with upside down umbrellas, a lush teal carpet, an orange-striped "cooling tower", and a pastel pink cabin referred to as "Turkish delight". The cooling tower is lined with pillows and functions as "a humorous twist on the padded cell," where people can retreat to cry or scream without being locked in. There is a stairway to nowhere, lined with a bookshelf full of books, selected by workshop participants. The welcome desk contains bottles filled with various pleasant scents, such as lavender and cinnamon. James Christian, an architect who contributed to the project writes: "Each structure, is an abstract interpretation of the feedback from the workshops, designed to offer varying levels 'of privacy and intimacy ranging from total isolation to complete togetherness.'" (Hohenadel, 2015)

An unnamed, middle-aged workshop participant interviewed following a workshop reflected on the his experience:

>The lightbulb moment was the idea of taking ownership... Where it fell down a bit, is how do you care for people that don't want to be cared for? How do you look after people who are in mental health but are unwilling to recognize they are in crisis? That was missing. But there was a real collective sense of wanting to create something real and actual. The energizing thing about was that it wasn't wishy-washy or hippie-dippy; it was based on real experience... a collective sense of wanting to create something real and actual. (O'Donoghue, 2014)

Here again we see that people asserting their voice by designing their psychiatric treatment is a fundamental, but surprising shift. A position that seems obvious once articulated is novel due to its rareness. According to this workshop participant, challenging questions around coercion and safety were avoided, but were present as a perpetual backdrop. While some of the designs imagined by the participants are impractical or unsafe, many could prove beneficial and effective. Following through on the design of a loving and supportive space must involve the input of all of the participants in that space. Crucially, the MADLOVE project does not deny the existence of mental distress, or even the value of safe institutional respites for support and healing. This radical expression emerges vividly from a straightforward application of "nothing about us, without us".

Leadbitter and Hull fully intend to continue developing this project after the installation closes. They continue to tour, plan to bring their designs to the UK's National Health Service, and have even talked about opening their own day hospital. They continue to advocate that design is important, and are committed "to creat[ing] unique space[s] where mutual care blossoms, stigma and discrimination are actively challenged, divisions understood, and madness can be experienced in a less painful way." (Disability Arts Online, 2014).

The MAD LOVE asylum is a clear example of applying the principle of "Nothing about us without us" to mad advocacy. While the project is not as radical as some experiments in non-coercive respite houses, it demonstrates the kinds of value the perspectives of patients can bring to the production of asylums, as well as how patient advocacy is not purely black and white in its criticism of the status quo. The participants in the designer asylum do not reject the need for asylums, but they do object to their current implementation, and the fact that they are excluded from participating in designing their implementations.

##Understanding Psychosis##

In 2014 the British Psychological Society, a professional association representing psychologists and psychology in in the UK, published a controversial report entitled "Understanding Psychosis and Schizophrenia". The report acknowledges the role of trauma, abuse or deprivation in the development of extreme experiences, talks about the advantages and disadvantages in calling these experiences symptoms of mental illness, and emphasizes the role of talking treatments in helping people make sense of their lives. The report also claims that "professionals should not insist that people accept any one particular framework of understanding, for example that their experiences are symptoms of an illness", and insists that "services need to change radically, and that we need to invest in prevention by taking measures to reduce abuse, deprivation and inequality." (p. 6) Contributors to the BPS report included leading experts and researchers in the field and "more than a quarter of the contributors are experts by experience --- people who have themselves heard voices, experienced paranoia or received diagnoses such as psychosis or schizophrenia." (p. 5)

The report was directed at therapists and practitioners, and was initially launched at a daylong conference in London on November 27, 2014. The conference program included academics, activists, contributors as well as the Shadow Minister for Public Health and Mental Health. A much wider audience engaged with this report, and reviews and responses have appeared in the BBC (Hill, 2014), The Guardian (Freeman & Freeman, 2014), the New York Times opinion pages (Luhrmann, 2015), The Huffington Post (Frances, 2014b), and the mass-market magazine Psychology Today (Davey, 2014; Maisel, 2014). The authors of the report worked hard to draft a document with a widely inclusive tone that incorporates a variety of perspectives and highlights the uncertainty in prevailing scientific explanations. It is rare for an association of mental health professionals to endorse such a blunt critique of psychiatric knowledge, and to admit alternative treatments and modalities of care. The report discusses the risks and benefits of taking psychiatric drugs, differentiates between acute and long-term pharmaceutical interventions, and questions evidence around specific accounts of the drug's mechanism of action.

The editors cite ambiguous studies of patient outcomes and spotlight individuals who are thriving without medication and positions drugs as one of many viable treatment options, not an absolute. (Slade, Amering & Oades, 2008; Van Os, Linscott, Myin-Germeys, Delespaul & Krabbendam 2009; Zipursky, Reilly & Murray, 2012) They claim "prescribers need to help people to weigh up the risks and benefits of taking particular drugs or indeed taking medication at all. People need to be able to try things out and arrive at an informed choice. Services should not pressurise people to take medication." (p. 55) Throughout the report, users of mental health services are quoted taking various positions, illustrating the benefits and downsides of different treatment regimes. The service users are treated as experts on their own lived experience, promoted to first class participants in the describing and evaluating their own care. The report questions the justification for various forms of coercion, stating that while compulsory detention may sometimes be justified, a UN task force has called for a ban on forced drugging, electroconvulsive therapy, restraints and seclusion (p. 110). The report also recognizes emotional suffering, and the role of professional treatment. Stories of professional support appear alongside those of pain and trauma, and they cite patients who have thrived after abandoning traditional psychiatric treatment. Its radical perspective is most evident in the call for providers to accept views other than the illness model, the call for collaboration to replace paternalism, and recognition of the role that social injustice and inequality plays in triggering individual pathologies.

The report became a polarized lighting rod, and it was simultaneously praised by some for its "remarkable" rejection of the centrality of diagnosis and also accused by others of drumming up psychiatric hate-mongering (Luhrmann, 2015; Coyne, 2015). It was challenged on multiple grounds, including the research methods employed, the publication format, and paradigmatic frame. Beyond their rational critique, establishment reviewers sounded infuriated by the report and lashed out with insults and putdowns:

>_Understanding Psychosis_ should be seen as a cruel hoax perpetrated against more typical severely disturbed mental health service users, their family, and policymakers. (Coyne, 2015)

Responding to a positive editorial review of the report written by Stanford anthropologist Tanya Marie Luhrmann, Columbia University's Chairman of Psychiatry and past president of the American Psychiatric Association attacked the journalistic integrity of the New York Times for publishing her review, and questioned the legitimacy of an anthropologist "opining on the scientific validity of [a medical specialty's] diagnoses":

>The article about mental illness was an incredibly unscholarly, misinformed, confused---at worst, unhelpful, and at best, destructive---commentary that will add to the confusion about the diagnosis of mental illness, enhance the stigma, and may lead some patients to doubt the veracity of the diagnoses that they have been given and the treatments that they are receiving... What would give an anthropologist license to comment on something that is so disciplined, bound in evidence, and scientifically anchored? (Lieberman, 2015)

Here Lieberman rehashes the battle lines of the Science Wars (Ross, 1996), and only wants psychiatrists to speak about treatment. Lieberman insists that psychiatric research is objective, based on "hard scientifically grounded" evidence, and fails to appreciate the values imposed by the narrative frame. In response to the report's contention that there is no sharp dividing line between mental illness and normality, Lieberman writes: "Although everyone knows that there is a spectrum of severity of symptoms in the context of an illness, there is no question that, at some point, they cross a threshold that defines symptoms as an illness." Anthropologists such as Luhrmann have a great deal to say about the construction of this threshold---who determines it, how they determine it, and how has it shifted over time. In effect, there is a question. Lieberman continues: "Viewing it this way is, in a way, challenging the veracity of diagnoses and giving people who have symptoms of a mental disorder, license to doubt that they may have an illness and need treatment." Here, Cooke and Luhrmann would likely agree. The report does challenge the veracity of diagnosis, drawing on a range of methods and evidence.

An intriguing line of critique is the claim that _psychiatrists'_ voices were stifled its creation, and this omission undermined the legitimacy of the findings:

>Key stakeholders were simply excluded – primary care physicians, social workers, psychiatrists, police and corrections personnel who must make decisions about how to deal with disturbed behavior, and –most importantly- the family members of persons with severe disturbance. There was no check on the psychologists simply slanting the document to conform to their own narrow professional self-interests, which we are asked to accept as "expertise." (Coyne, 2015)

Of note, I didn't see any psychiatrists named as contributors to the report, but I'm happy to be corrected. (Laws, Lanford & Huda, 2014)

The insistence on incorporating stakeholders in the creation of this document is particularly ironic, since psychiatry has perpetrated this exclusion for decades. As the dominant actors, there are ample platforms available for psychiatrists to express themselves, as their voices represent the mainstream status quo and are amplified by the pharmaceutical juggernaut. None of the stakeholders enumerated in this critique are consulted in the composition of the DSM, and similarly, there is "no check" on psychiatrists "simply slanting the document to conform to their own narrow professional self-interests". The report may have garnered more legitimacy with psychiatrist contributors, but it extensively cites psychiatric journals and studies, and many of the psychologists who contributed have appointments at psychiatric institutes. Notably, Coyne ignores the inclusion of people diagnosed with psychiatric conditions and their lived expertise, as he snidely dismisses the expertise of clinical psychologists with scare quotes.

The voice of psychiatry can be heard throughout this report, explicitly through citations, and implicitly, through the hegemonic paradigm this report challenges. Non-human actors, such as the DSM and studies endorsing the medical model, speak on psychiatry's behalf. There is certainly a vocal minority of psychiatrists who might have participated in this report, but their absence does not undermine the report's legitimacy. We need to acknowledge mechanisms for challenging the dominant paradigm even if the powers under assault refuse to participate in this critique.

The _Understanding Psychosis_ report also quotes the language of The Icarus Project to illustrate alternative frames used by people use to describe their altered states. "Self-help organization _The Icarus Project_ views both 'psychotic' and 'bipolar' experiences as 'a dangerous gift' and aims to help its members 'navigate the space between brilliance and madness'" (p. 53). The authors of the report did not directly consult with members of The Icarus Project, but The Icarus Project was elevated to a stakeholder by virtue of its inclusion. The ensuing discourse surrounding the report's publication reveals the position of the psychiatric establishment. The credibility of the British Psychological Association proved difficult to ignore, and mainstream US psychiatrists were compelled to listen to them, even if, on the whole, their response was demeaning and dismissive. This is more than can be said about the voices people without professional credentials but who possess an informal expertise that derives from self-study and lived experience. Their critiques are rarely heard or responded to, and demanding this recognition needs to become a central platform of the c/s/x movement.

It is intriguing that both the designer asylum project and the _Understanding Psychosis_ report came out of the UK, begging the question of cross cultural comparison. The UK has a strong history of Critical Psychiatry, which resembles the APA's radical caucus, but has greater traction and a larger membership. Perhaps underlying the strength of the Critical Psychiatry network and the greater popularity of these ideas is the UK's universal health care. Much of the conversation around US mental health policy is caught up in the question access to services, whether or not those services are beneficial or harmful. In the UK, and other countries with socialized medicine (e.g., Finland, where the OpenDialogue method was pioneered), where _access_ to services is assured, the conversations around mental health policy can focus on the _nature_ of services.

##Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies##

On March 7, 2015 I attended a lecture given by Mark Solms, PhD entitled "Neuropsychoanalysis: Dangers and Opportunities" at NYU's School of Medicine (Solms, 2015). Over one-hundred people attended the lecture, and the lecture hall was literally standing room only. Solms is part of an emerging movement to incorporate psychoanalysis into the study of neuroscience, and his talk was aimed at a general audience and was not focused specifically on pathologies. Solms spent a long time in his presentation discussing theories of mind, and regularly attends conferences on consciousness alongside neuroscientists and analytic philosophers of mind (notably, he mentioned that clinicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists are typically absent from those conferences). He describes himself as a "dual-aspect monist", explaining his commitment to avoiding mind-body dualism, while maintaining that the language of feelings cannot be simply reduced or translated to the language of neurons, and that both discourses remain valuable and meaningful. His research program aims to advance the psychoanalytic program, with the generous incorporation of neuroscientific findings where helpful, alongside the infusion of neuroscience with psychoanalytic knowledge.

Solms connects Freud's theories of mind to neurological research, but maintains that both discourses inform one other, and can't be simply translated or reduced. He views neuropsychoanalysis as completing Freud's program, revising and correcting it based on new evidence. The neurospychoanalysts interpret neuroscience findings as a confirmation of Freud's central ideas, including unconscious motivation, repression, the pleasure principle, and the id/ego/superego. Solms has argued that the brain's "seeking system" may be the basis for Freud's libido drive, and has used cognitive neuroscience findings on aphasia to interpret narcissistic tendencies (Solms, M., & Turnbull, O. 2002).

Solms is perhaps most famous for engaging in a decade-long debate with Allan Hobson, professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School over the relevance of Freud to neuroscience and especially over the significance of dreams. A detailed summary of the details of their debate is not relevant to this dissertation, but I include a sketch of their debate to provide some texture. Hobson's research on the neurological mechanisms of dreaming aims to show that dreams are effectively random, and that emotional interpretations of dreams are misguided. Dream interpretation is one of the foundational methods of Freudian analysis, and rendering dreams meaningless is an assault on psychoanalysis itself. Solms deliberately designed a research program with the aim of salvaging dreams, and through a series of clever experiments with brain-lesion patients, demonstrated that dreams are in fact generated by a network of structures in the brain associated with instinctual-motivational circuitry. Solms helped render Freud's wish-fulfillment theory of dreams respectable again, and in April 2006 Solms and Hobson met for the first time for a formal "Dream Debate" in Tuscon, Arizona at a conference entitled 'Toward a Science of Consciousness'. The debate was the culmination of a series of standoffs in journal articles, books, and a pair of articles in _Scientific American_. Other researchers have challenged the pairs' methods and conclusions, and have argued that Hobson and Solms have used their evidence around dreaming to advance their beliefs about Freud. (Dumhoff, 2005)

As we saw earlier in Chapter 4, and as Brad Lewis argues in "Where is US Psychiatry Going? From the Biomedical Model to Neuropsychiatry" psychiatry is poised to embrace neuroscience along with information processing models of cognition and pathology (in press). In the wake of the publication of the DSM5, the National Institute of Mental Health announced that it would be "re-orienting its research away from the DSM-5" and will be "collecting the genetic, imaging, physiologic, and cognitive data to see how all the data – not just the symptoms – cluster and how these clusters relate to treatment response." (Insel, 2013) The Obama administration's BRAIN (Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies) initiative alongside the European Union's Human Brain Project are both modeled on the Human Genome Project and seek to map every neuron and brain circuit in the human brain. As with the genome, there is some recognition of the uniqueness and diversity of individual brains, but there are also assumptions being made about uniform features across individuals and demographics. The theory of "neuroplasticity", the idea that brain structures continue to change as we learn, has gained acceptance among neuroscientists, challenging even further our ability to make generalizations about an individual's brain. The BRAIN initiative's website describes the project as follows:

>By accelerating the development and application of innovative technologies, researchers will be able to produce a revolutionary new dynamic picture of the brain that, for the first time, shows how individual cells and complex neural circuits interact in both time and space. Long desired by researchers seeking new ways to treat, cure, and even prevent brain disorders, this picture will fill major gaps in our current knowledge and provide unprecedented opportunities for exploring exactly how the brain enables the human body to record, process, utilize, store, and retrieve vast quantities of information, all at the speed of thought. (The Brain Initiative, n.d.)

These efforts and advances threaten to displace the biochemical paradigm that currently dominates psychiatric models. There is an air of inevitability around the encroachment of neuroscience and brain imaging into our understanding of brains and behaviors. In this context, Solms and the larger neuropsychoanalytic movement represent a leading hope for the incorporation of subjectivity, feelings and meaning into the psychiatric discourse. Yet, neuropsychoanalysis remains a fringe discipline, largely ignored by mainstream neuroscience.

How will the c/s/x movement respond to these new realities and constructs? In a narrow sense, the encroachment of neuroscience on the biochemical model is consistent with decades of critique by those critical of psychiatry and might be celebrated. Is the emerging paradigm an improvement? Does it reinforce existing power dynamics?

Undoubtedly, the movement's criticism of psychiatry is becoming stale as the underlying context shifts. However, many of the essential critiques we have distilled remain as relevant as ever. To begin with, Solms and the larger field of neuropsychoanalysis neglect a socio-cultural analysis in their models of pathology. Neuropsychoanalysts continue to locate all pathology within the heads of their patients, and do not broaden their analysis to include oppression, injustice and intergenerational trauma. Beyond this omission, a deeper critique of their approach centers on questions of authority and knowledge production. Although neuropsychoanalysis sounds more encompassing analytically, the scientist and/or psychotherapist make the important, defining judgments. The analysand may provide feedback to their analyst, but does not participate in the creation of the rubrics and models that shape their diagnosis and treatment. If this participation were an essential component of the treatment, at least there would be an opportunity and a mechanism to address the prior omissions of the socio-cultural factors. Such an approach would introduce many demands on the analyst, and require a flexibility that few schools of analysis exhibit. There are certainly gifted and caring analysts who adopt a more inclusive approach by virtue of their personality and values, treating each and every one of their patients as unique individuals. However, there is also overwhelming pressure to treat patients using assembly-line protocols, aimed to maximize efficiency and treat as many patients as quickly as possible, leaving little room for variation and context.

Speculating on the impact of the neuropsychoanalytic frame is not simply a polemical exercise since contexts continue to shift quickly. The language and values that the Icarus Project has developed is still widely applicable to these emerging contexts, although clearer articulations of their beliefs and demands are important to distill. Overly simplistic rejections of the "biomedical model" risk exposing the group to charges of "anti-science", and being lumped in the same camp as the anti-vaccine movement or climate-change deniers. The richness of the language that the Icarus Project has developed expresses much more than the rejection of the biomedical model, and their critique may very well endure well beyond the lifespan of the biomedical model itself. By returning to the foundational assertion of self-determination, informed consent, and their right to participate in the co-construction of the knowledge of their own diagnosis and treatment the problems with neuropsychoanalysis are readily apparent.

Many of the same issues The Icarus Project confronts under the existing psychiatric regime will continue to exist under whatever paradigm succeeds next. Informed consent, requiring access to accurate information, is becoming increasingly difficult to comprehend in the face of a sea of information and misinformation. Pharma's marketing campaigns continue to grow in sophistication, along with the rest of the advertising industry. When it comes to consent, technologies of surveillance continue advance coercive techniques through the enforcement of drug adherence and behavioral monitoring. Congress is poised to pass federal legislation extending involuntary outpatient treatment programs, modeled on New York State's Kendra's Law (1999) and California's Laura's Law (2002). Beyond the clear-cut cases of state mandated compliance, prisoners, seniors in nursing homes, and children are all constituents whose agency is limited, and whose consent is questionable. And, as cultural pressure mounts to correct deviant behavior and perform according to prescribed standards, it is becoming more difficult to opt-out of treatment. Consent has become elusive, well beyond the obvious violations of state mandated forced treatment.

#Mad Futures#

Recognition at the tables of power is only a precondition for the kinds of changes in treatment, attitude and policy that the movement would like see emerge. What might the regime of mental health look like if the activists prevailed? What would victory look like and what issues might displace the current priorities? What are the stakes of these showdowns and how do they intersect with broader trends in advocacy for social justice, freedom and equality?

The BPA's report on _Understanding Psychosis_ does an excellent job painting a picture of what a treatment paradigm would look like if it incorporated a deep respect for the expertise of lived experience. This perspective is characterized by loving and compassionate support instead of punitive punishment, collaboration over patronization, and self-determination and informed consent over bullying and coercion. It is also clear that time and again stories of interpersonal and intergenerational trauma dominate the personal narratives of people struggling with their mental health and these histories need to be appreciated and acknowledged, not minimized and neglected. While various schools of psychoanalysis and forms of therapy try to deal with interpersonal and intergenerational trauma, these frames of treatment have been almost entirely displaced by dispensing pills. Tanya Luhrmann's ethnography of American psychiatry, _Of Two Minds_, identified the twin poles of the biomedical model and the psychodynamic model that dominated psychiatric training and clinical practice in the 1990s. This tension is almost unrecognizable today, as the biomedical model has come to completely dominate psychiatric practice in America (Martin, 2007).

The problems with psychiatry do not begin and end with bedside manner, but a culture of arrogance and bullying exacerbates the doctor/patient relationship and undermines trust. People receiving treatment want to feel listened to. They want their experiences validated and they want to be treated like a person not a label. The language of their interactions should reflect these concerns and respect their agency, not assault them with a barrage of aggressions, micro- and macro-. Sayantani DasGupta's call in the _Lancet_ for "narrative humility" traces the problems in doctor's attitudes to an educational curriculum that certifies cultural mastery at the completion of a weekend workshop (2008).

An Icarista's anecdote illustrates this dynamic: After ten years on a particular anti-depressant she wanted to try switching to another since they were dissatisfied with the drug she was taking. After a few weeks on the new drug she asked her doctor to help wean her off the new drug and wanted to return to the original one she had been taking. She believed that the new drug was causing panic attacks and extreme anxiety, and she experienced less anxiety when they reduced their own dosage. Their psychiatrist stubbornly refused to acknowledge that the new medication might cause anxiety and would not write them a prescription for their original medication. The Icarista asked the psychiatrist if he had ever taken the drug (he had not), and was hurt that her experience was belittled and dismissed. She had not asked to come off of her medication entirely, merely explore alternative medical treatments, but nonetheless she was rendered effectively invisible and powerless. Providers need to listen better and work together with their patients to create an environment of mutual respect and trust, conducive to long-term healing.

C/s/x activists are also some of the most vocal advocates for examining the connections between systems of inequality and injustice and their correlations with mental illness. We live in a world where violent, self-destructive, and even suicidal policies are regarded as sane, and it's the captains of government and capital who ought to be restrained. War criminals, environment destroyers, and compulsive usurers walk free while those who speak truth to their power are often diagnosed and aggressively treated. Our consensual reality is crazy sick, and desperately needs an imagination infusion.

These broader issues of injustice are inextricably linked to mental health, as numerous studies have linked poverty, racism, discrimination to mental health. (Link & Phelan, 1995; Cohen & Timimi 2008; Metzl & Hansen 2014) This is unsurprising as mental illness is also strongly correlated to stress and trauma and these systems of oppression generate an excess of both. Marginalized populations like minorities, prisoners, children in foster care, and the poor are also more likely to receive certain diagnoses and treatments. (Metzl, 2010; Levine, 2015) In these circumstances psychiatry become visible as an instrument for oppression and control, far exceeding its mandate to alleviate emotional suffering.

Popular social justice leaders rarely incorporate the pharm-psychiatric complex into their analysis of power, even though it is an important cog in wheel of the systems they critique. It's accurate to say that the school-to-prison pipeline is greased with psychiatric diagnoses and treatments, as a diagnosis of Oppositional Defiance Disorder (ODD) is often the first step on the road to juvenile detention. Though stigma and shame, the system also perpetuates feelings of isolation and alienation that, in turn, help reinforce the growth of a range of '-isms' (capitalism, consumerism, neoliberalism, etc).

Our current trajectory suggests dystopic futures, especially in light of the trend towards predictive diagnosis and treatment. As we saw in Chapter 2, prodromal diagnosis, also known as psychotic risk syndrome, threaten to expand psychiatry's reach exponentially. As Frances, the editor of the DSM-IV argued, the diagnoses of present conditions are already overly expansive. Diagnosing and treating people who are _at risk_ for developing these conditions will expand the diagnostic net to threatening proportions. Preventative treatment and algorithmic diagnoses pose a grave threat to civil liberties, analogous to the criminal profiling, the notorious "stop-and-frisk" practices of the NYPD (New York Civil Liberties Union, 2014) and the "signature kills" of the Obama administrations drone program (Shane, 2015). The counterfactual logic of this paradigm is slippery and dangerous---if you manifest symptoms, you are psychotic; if you have not manifested them, yet, you are prodromal. The treatment of prodromal patients who fail to develop symptoms is seen as a success, even though there is no reliable way to ascertain how they would have progressed without treatment.

The threat of prodromal diagnoses looms even larger under the emerging neurobiological-information processing paradigm than it did under the DSM paradigm. NIMH's move away from the DSM is motivated by the unreliability of the diagnostic categories, and endorses an evidence base built around symptoms, described by neuroimaging, neurobiology and genetics. The new paradigm doubles down on scientific objectivity, formulating pathologies in terms of symptoms with objective laboratory measures. Instead of seizing the opportunity to reformulate psychiatric knowledge through the assembly and composition of a wider range of stakeholders, psychiatry is on track to define mental wellness and illness exclusively in terms that can be measured in a laboratory. This materialist reduction completely disregards the socio-cultural context, as well as the experiential perspectives and expertise that are not represented by seemingly objective measurements. The value judgments that continue to underlie the acceptance of different ranges of human experience are masked by the appeal to measurable evidence.

This focus on measurable symptoms, many of which are correlated with crisis but alone are not enough for a diagnosis, is even more amenable to algorithmic monitoring and predictive profiling. A recent study currently underway in Australia illustrates this trend. The study, called "Facebook use in affective disorders" is a collaboration between researchers from the Monash Alfred Psychiatry Centre and computer scientists from the School of Intelligent Systems at RMIT University. (The FAD Study, 2014) A central question motivating the study is to find out if the onset of manic episodes can be predicted by changes in Facebook use. After encountering anecdotal accounts of dramatic changes in Facebook usage around episodes, the researchers designed this study. They are not analyzing the contents of participants' postings. They are recording the date and time of user activity where activity is defined as a comment, a like, a post, an upload or a message. Participants also self-report their moods to researchers daily, and also indicate historical date ranges for previous manic episodes to establish baselines of activity. The results of this study have not yet been published, and the study does not recommend actionable interventions based on these findings.

During my field work with The Icarus Project I encountered many situations where social media was used to monitor and judge people's mental states. In some instances, social media played a wide a role in diagnoses and forced treatment. One friend of mine described how his mother had printed out his status updates and brought them to his doctor to argue he should be institutionalized. The conspiratorial status updates were unthreatening, but were out of character and were construed as bizarre. He was involuntarily committed, and his social media updates combined with his Mother's concern were surely a factor in his psychatrist's judgment. Other stories I have heard were related to people expressing sadness and despair, scaring their friends and loved ones. In another specific instance a friend shared disappointing news on Facebook, and although she did not threaten herself, another friend called the suicide hotline after jumping to the conclusion she was suicidal. Instead of reaching out to support her directly, her friend intervened based on a status update. Unleashing predictive algorithms on these behavioral data sets threatens to expand the diagnostic gaze even wider and exposes many populations to widespread abuse through new forms of control.

#\#alternatives#

The most important undertaking for the movement right now is the creation of positive alternatives. Without these alternatives, even well intentioned authorities have little recourse when faced with personal crisis. Establishing projects and programs that embody the values and priorities of the movement will help advance the agenda through demonstration and performative critique.

Numerous leaders in the mental health reform movement have called for a focus on the creation of these alternatives. One of the movement's most important peer-organized national conferences is simply called "Alternatives." This conference has run yearly since 1985 and explores support and treatment models beyond the mainstream. (Zinman, 2009) Alternatives is sponsored by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), a federal agency founded in 1992 to advance the behavioral health of the nation.

The Icarus Project, a long time participant in the Alternatives conference, represents an attempt to seed these kinds of alternatives, and their membership and media continue to play a central role in fertilizing other organizations and initiatives. New therapeutic paradigms such as the Open Dialogue Approach, a technique pioneered in Finland, show great promise for transforming crisis interventions, as well as ongoing therapy. The Open Dialogue approach is a holistic technique that locates pathology in the network of social relationships, rather than any one person's head. The therapeutic technique invites the person's social network into dialog, and seeks to create psychological meaning out of symptoms and experiences. It emphasizes flexibility and focuses on promoting dialog. The outcomes reported in Findland are extremely positive and the ideas have been spreading quickly in the US and beyond. (Intervoice, 2013)

New approaches for avoiding hospitalization are also emerging and gaining some tenuous traction. In 2012, SAMHSA funded an innovative project in New York City designed to help reduce incidents of forced hospitalization. The Parachute project runs a series of respite houses that provide services for people in crisis. Prospective guests can apply for up to 14 days of free accommodations once a mental health professional provides a letter that they are not a threat to themselves or others. The Parachute facilities are run by peers, practice harm reduction approaches to substance abuse, do not forcibly medicate, restrain or seclude, and residents can come and go as they please. Parachute also supports a support line and a mobile intervention team that arrives at the site of a crisis and is trained to diffuse it using an open dialogue approach. The three year pilot has just received approval to begin accepting Medicaid, which will allow it to continue operating beyond the period of its seed grant. It is unclear if the respite model can scale beyond a few dozen beds, but early indicators suggest that the program has been very successful at helping the participants who have been lucky enough to be aware of it avoid hospitalization, at a greatly reduced cost.

SAMHSA has faced harsh criticism for creating inclusive spaces for dialogue and for their sponsorship of peer-run community programs and patient advocacy groups. In the wake of the Sandy Hook shootings in 2013, SAMHSA came under attack and was called to testify at a series of hearings before the House Oversight and Investigations subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce Committee to justify their funding priorities. (Earley, 2013; Examining SAMHSA's role in delivering services to the severely mentally ill, 2013) The chairman of the committee, Congressman Tim Murphy (R, PA), is also a clinical psychologist who also serves in the Naval reserves and works with service members suffering from PTSD. In his opening statements at the May 22, 2013 hearing, Murphy remarked: "the committee has seen substantial evidence that too many of these grants are directed to advancing services rooted in unproven social theory and feel-good fads, rather than science... we expect SAMHSA's work to be firmly rooted in evidence-based practices, enduring high-level scientific peer review at the hands of licensed mental health professionals." (Examining SAMHSA's role in delivering services to the severely mentally ill, 2013) He critiqued the organization for sponsoring the Alternatives conference by referencing a mind/body fitness session with questionable scientific merit, and for providing grant funding to groups that are hostile to the sciences of psychiatry and psychology, question diagnostic labels, and provide advice about coming off of psychiatric medication. During the hearing SAMHSA was challenged for having only four full-time psychiatrists on their staff of 534, and for lacking a policy mandating that their grant reviewers were lacking scientific credentials versus "just experience". It seems like SAMHSA would benefit from more clinical and research psychiatrists on staff, to increase their credibility as well as integrate more perspectives from across the divide. This current breakdown serves to reinforce the divisions between different constituencies of mental health professionals.

Neither the congressional subcommittee or SAMHSA explicitly discussed what kinds of evidence would constitute support for an continued funding of alternative approaches, although assumptions about what constitutes valid evidence was an implicit tension underlying this hearing. This tension extended beyond alternative approaches to healing, and encompassed the very methods for evaluating these approaches, and the means for resolving conflicts when people disagreed on their effectiveness. Murphy's perspective assumes medical experts collecting quantifiable variables is the best way to objectively measure efficacy. Other committee members, and some of SAMHSA's constituents believe that efficacy cannot be objectively measured, and that the qualitative stories of people receiving these interventions need to be considered alongside quantitative methods. This divides is visible in many other areas of policy and research, and it is important to recognize this standoff as an instance of a wider disagreement over what evidence counts, not just a disagreement over how to best support the mentally ill.

The SAMHSA administrator Pamela Hyde responded defensively to the committee's allegations. She explained that SAMHSA awards grants to projects, not organizations, and the projects funded aligned with SAMHSA's mission even if the grantee's overall mission did not. She claimed SAMHSA did not review each session at the conference and was unaware of their contents. She also pointed out that psychiatrists command higher salaries than SAMHSA can afford, and that the kinds of services SAMHSA sponsors are within the expertise of social workers. Instead overtly defending the support and inclusion of alternative voices and treatment initiatives, Hyde's responses were timid and evasive. She relied on Congresswoman Diana DeGetten's (D, CO) questions to remind the committee that SAMHSA was mandated by congress to support patient advocacy groups, and that congress set SAMHSA's priorities and mandated the percentage of their budget to apply to substance abuse versus serious mental illness. Hyde avoided taking a strong stand for SAMHSA's inclusive policies, even though the committee was intent on exposing and challenging them.

This hearing clearly demonstrates the stakes of credibility. The legitimacy of lived experience is repeatedly questioned, denying the very possibility for gathering evidence to support voices from outside mainstream psychiatry. In her opening statement, ranking Congresswoman DeGetten remarked on a glaring omission in the hearing's testimony:

>Now, I just want to raise one concern about these hearings. This is the third proceeding on mental health, and for the third time we don't have a witness appearing to provide the perspective of people who are living with mental illness. We discussed this the other day. We keep talking about issues that affect their daily lives. We keep having providers and family members and others coming in to talk about people with mental illness but we haven't had people who have mental illness directly talk to us, and I think there are people who would be willing to come forward and talk about their concerns and their issues, which of these SAMHSA programs work for them, which of them don't work for them. What about the privacy provisions and what about the everything, the funding and everything? So I am hoping in our next hearing we could have a panel of people who have mental illness to talk about from their perspective what works and doesn't work. (2013)

To the best of my knowledge, witnesses living with mental illness were never called to testify.

The outcome of these hearings was the drafting of the Helping Families In Mental Health Crisis Act, also known as the Murphy bill. H.R.3717 was introduced in December 2013, but was never enacted. Murphy plans to reintroduce the bill in 2015. The bill includes provisions to gut SAMHSA's funding and power by redirecting funds to the NIMH and through the creation of a new office in the Department of Health and Human Services. The bill also legalizes "assisted outpatient treatment" (AOT), which is a euphemism for forced treatment in outpatient settings. The AOT measures helped mobilize many patient and civil rights advocacy groups to speak out against the bill.

At its heart, the bill was crafted under the erroneous assumption that mental illness causes violence. Studies have repeatedly shown that the occurrence of violence amongst the mentally ill matches the rates of violence in the general population. Increased mental illness screenings and forced preventative care will not lead to a reduction in violent crimes. What the investigations behind this bill also betray is the central contention of this dissertation---mental health activists need to demand a legitimate voice in their support and treatment. Their voices are systematically marginalized and dismissed despite the practical value of their techniques and approaches.

Many of the ideas and proposals have been articulated and piloted. What remains is their adoption. Alternative voices with relevant expertise have been speaking up for decades. We just need to start listening to them.

#Conclusion#

In 1998 the American Legacy Foundation (ALF) was established as a part of the settlement agreement between the states and the tobacco industry. ALF is the largest non-profit public health organization in the US and is dedicated to tobacco control. The organization funds campaigns and educational initiatives to help reduce smoking and counters the marketing engine of the tobacco industry. The tobacco industry betrayed everyone's trust with decades of toxic cover ups and lies, and this record-setting, landmark settlement included the establishment of an independent non-profit that would counter their marketing and advertising through education and outreach. In effect, ALF speaks for the smokers and their families, and has launched incredibly successful campaigns around awareness and cessation.

The mad movement would benefit greatly from a similar organization, and the parallels between Big Tobacco and Big Pharma are striking. The pharmaceutical industry has betrayed the Hippocratic oath to do no harm, and has also perpetrated decades of toxic cover ups and lies. The scandals and lawsuits around anti-psychotics and anti-depressants may yield settlements that rivals the settlement with the tobacco industry, and when that day arrives the movement should be ready with an implementation plan for the kinds of campaigns and educational programming it would sponsor. There is a desperate need for education and marketing around psychiatric diagnosis and treatment that is not sponsored by the pharmaceutical companies, according to alternative frames and narratives.

The central problematic we grappled with in this dissertation is how mad folk can assert their voices when their own identity renders them irrational, categorically excluded from all discourse. At the heart of these issues, it remains peculiar and unjust that a very small group of mostly white, middle-aged men with degrees in medicine (Lewis, 2006) are deciding the criteria for a normal range of human experience. We witnessed the systemic marginalizing and silencing of people with lived psychiatric experience among some of the most progressive groups of professionals at Occupy Wall Street and the APA's radical caucus. Without question, the attention and respect paid to the non-credentialed only gets worse outside these circles.

We also explored the history and culture of the Icarus Project, synthesizing an answer to the question---what did they just say? After a dozen years of organizing, the membership of The Icarus Project said many things, some directly, some implied. One powerful theme that emerges from their advocacy is simple, yet immensely powerful. The organizing principle most visible in this examination is the repeated assertion of the demand – "Nothing about us, without us". This finding is at once, both subtle and stark. While this principle may seem innocuous, a deep realization of this goal would go a long way towards correcting some of the most egregious overextensions of psychiatric oppression and control.

Seats at the tables of power are only the precondition for change. Good ideas need to be proposed, heard and acted on. Throughout this project we also heard, loud and clear, the values and principles that mad folks prioritize and the kinds of language and treatments they prefer. Language and labels matter. Stories and identities matter. Cultural competency matters. Basic humility and sensitivity matter. Force and coercion are blatantly unjust, but in many encounters with psychiatry trust is violated long before these lines are crossed. Patronizing attitudes, self-assured certainty and unchecked arrogance run rampant in clinical settings, percolating through the system and running through research agendas and advertising campaigns alike.

These attitudes run deep in our epistemic culture, and cut to the heart many practical standoffs around what's knowable and how we go about knowing. Congressman Murphy's insistence on "evidence-based" research is code for a certain kind of research---namely quantitative data, backed by objective scientific methods. Ethnographies are struggling for recognition and validity across a range of disciplines, including psychology, public policy and political science, and represent one way that the voices can be represented, albeit through the medium of a researcher. These fields continue to be dominated by quantitative methods, which provide important knowledge, but must be tempered and balanced with the textured context of qualitative methods for a fuller comprehension of any social phenomena. A strong embrace of "Nothing about us, without us" includes adjustments to our current standards of knowledge production. Ethnographies of psychiatry such as Luhrmann's _Of Two Minds_ (2001) and patient experience such as Martin's _Bipolar Expeditions: Mania and Depression in American Culture_ are two examples of anthropological contributions to the field. The designer asylum art project represents yet another model of direct participation in the creation of solutions and meaning. The burgeoning "quantified self" movement may represent yet another avenue for developing a deeper understanding of what helps. Similar to journaling, but with the potential to collect and correlate many more data streams, some individuals are taking the responsibility to systematically catalog patterns in nutrition, sleep, exercise, stress and medication interactions. I have heard presentations where some patients report curing their own Irritable Bowel Syndrome, managing their blood sugar, and using these techniques as an instrument to promote behavioral change. There are numerous mood tracking applications that may soon be brought to bear on some of these questions of efficacy, incorporating both quantitative and qualitative data, from the perspective of the individual stakeholder. At some point, even the FDA may be forced to consider these data sources alongside formal research studies.

Many viable alternatives to mainstream approaches are being floated and piloted across the country. These alternatives need to be studied using a variety of methods, and nurtured and successful experiments need to be given the resources to scale and flourish.

Evaluation of the efficacy of these alternatives is a challenge, and a range of methods and stakeholders need to be incorporated to make sense of what works for whom. As with other areas of alternative medicine, such as acupuncture, chiropractice, herbalism there is no single solution that works for everyone, yet many of these approaches work very well for some people. It is very difficult to develop an accurate picture of what helps, especially when the approaches defy prevailing paradigms, and do not support existing profit models. Combatting these biases will require open minds and a dedicated effort to listen to people who are suffering---patients, their families, c/s/x activists, and the full range of service providers they encounter. Synthesizing these perspectives is a formidable challenge that multiple choice surveys and economic indicators cannot capture alone. Whether someone prefers to treat their psychosis or to cultivate approaches for controlling their dangerous gifts, they need to be given the respect they deserve, as a human being and as a fully empowered partner in their own treatment and care.

In the coming decade, the mad movement will face serious threats as it pursues the elusive dream of liberation. The movement's context is shifting dramatically, and their messages will need to be retargeted and refreshed. By staking their claim on their right to speak and be heard, they will create the platform to surface and shape their concerns. Escaping from the prison of tautological silencing is imperative for all future campaigns. Framing the struggle in terms of the meta-issue of participation and empowerment enables coalitions of activists to stand in solidarity with their mad comrades. Remember, whatever happens next, you are not alone.