\chapter{Introduction}\label{chapter-one}

\cleanchapterquote{I will neither give a deadly drug to anybody if asked for it, nor will I make a suggestion to this effect... I will apply, for the benefit of the sick, all measures [that] are required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and therapeutic nihilism... I will not be ashamed to say "I know not,"... In purity and holiness I will guard my life and my art.}{Hippocratic Oath}{Hippocrates} 

In August 2007 _The Onion_, a satirical publication with a track record of clever and incisive socio-cultural observations, ran a story with the headline "Woman Overjoyed By Giant Uterine Parasite" (2007). The story described the patient's happiness about the "golf ball–sized, nutrient-sapping organism embedded deep in the wall of her uterus". It also describes how this "endoparasitic ailment" is a "disorder [that] strikes without prejudice across racial, ethnic, and class lines", and its symptoms can include "nausea, vomiting, constipation, irritability, emotional instability, swollen or tender breasts, massive weight gain, severe loss of bone density, fatigue, insomnia". The author sustains a pitch-perfect deadpan tone for over 500 words, and describes the clinical dark sides of the creature "writhing restlessly inside her... robbing her of her strength and stamina". All this is juxtaposed with the patient's exuberance over the "miracle" and her excitement over telling her parents about the parasite. The readers are left to figure out for themselves that she's pregnant.

E.B. White famously claimed that explaining a joke is like dissecting a frog. "Humor can be dissected, as a frog can, but the thing dies in the process and the innards are discouraging to any but the pure scientific mind" (White, 1941). While we might kill this joke through serious examination, it brilliantly captures an essential issue at the theoretical heart of the controversies surrounding mental health and wellness. This _Onion_ story is one of my favorite illustrations of the challenges we face when untangling facts from values. In purely factual terms, the _Onion's_ clinical description of pregnancy is accurate. However, the framing of the pregnant woman's condition, and the cynical and deprecating attitude applied to the shared underlying facts, succinctly illustrate the power of the narrator and the dominant narrative. Most humans throughout history have greeted pregnancy as a cause for celebration, even though it carries some negative consequences, including, in early eons, childbirth fever and early death for the mother. Healthy pregnancies are not typically categorized as 'disorders', even though the symptoms caused by pregnancy could very well be construed as such. Through humor, _The Onion_ illustrates the power of language, and the ways which narratives shape and distort consensual reality.

The production of psychiatric knowledge currently shares many absurdities with the portrayal of pregnancy in _The Onion_. Psychiatry is wedded to an epistemology that is rooted in an outdated philosophy of science, clinging to a diminished conception of objectivity and scientific authority as a trump card that the psychiatric-pharmaceutical establishment uses to shut down and short circuit debate. Psychiatry is wedded to an impoverished vocabulary, and refuses to acknowledge the validity of alternative descriptions and understandings of experiences. Psychiatrists insist that their diagnostic language is the privileged or even the sole legitimate way to give an account of, and an explanation for, mental reality. Laboratory data in the forms of neuro-imaging, genetic sequencing and bio/blood-chemistry are offered as conclusive evidence that patients are broken and need to be fixed. These forms of evidence are wielded to bluntly assert the necessity of psychiatric diagnoses and treatment. The stakes here go beyond the binaries of illness or wellness--it is essential to acknowledge the real phenomena of emotional trauma, suffering, crisis and illness. The substantive controversy is about where and how these binary lines are drawn, what we call people on either side of the line, and who is involved in drawing them?

This dissertation tells the story of an emerging wave of mad resistance which challenges the assumptions underlying this drawing of lines. A new generation of mad activists is struggling to assert their right to substantively engage in the conversation around their own identities and self-care. They want to participate in the production of the knowledge that governs their diagnosis and treatment, and they are questioning the very language and narrative frames used to talk about their mental health and wellness. Their argument, embodied in their stories, represents a dramatic shift from the anti-psychiatrist, psychiatric survivors, and consumer movements that preceded them.

#Participatory paradoxes#

Over the past decade the politics and rhetoric of activists organizing around mental health issues have begun to shift dramatically. These shifts have been simultaneously subtle and stark. Crucially, some elements of the movement have moved away from a purely oppositional, head-butting critique of the psychiatric-pharmaceutical alliance, and their demands have begun to focus on questions of voice. In the tradition of the disability rights movement, this new generation of the mad resistance has taken up the cry "Nothing about us without us". James Charlton cataloged the centrality of this phrase to disability rights in his book _Nothing About Us Without Us: Disability Oppression and Empowerment_ (1998). Charlton first heard the expression invoked by leaders of the South African disabled people's group in 1993, who claimed to have heard it used earlier at an Eastern European international disability rights conference (p. 2). Two years later he saw a front page headline in the Mexico City daily about thousands of landless peasants marching under the banner "Nunca Mas Sin Nosotros" (Never Again Without Us), and adopted "Nothing about us without us" as the working title of his book.

Chalrton quotes Ed Roberts, a leader of the international disability rights movement"If we have learned one thing from the civil rights movement in the U.S., it's that when others speak for you, you lose" (Driedger 1989:28), and traces the impulse behind the expression "Nothing about us without us" to the civil rights era, embodied in works such as _Our Bodies, Ourselves: A book by and for women_ (Boston Women's Health Book Collective, 1973), and the widely used civil rights slogan "Power to the People".

On the surface the proposition "Nothing about us without us" seems timid and easy to satisfy. However, it has proven to be one of the most radical demands the movement can make. It has radical implications for the ways in which human conditions are investigated and addressed. It also challenges the binary distinction between objectivity and subjectivity, and calls into question the possibly of objective knowledge devoid of context.

Mad folk have traditionally occupied a paradoxical place in public discourse. By definition they are branded "irrational" and are categorically precluded from having a voice in rational public debate. In an age when people of all sorts insist that their understandings of themselves and their problems matter, how can this constituency find their voices, sustain them, and make them persuasive? Who will accept their legitimacy and listen? This problematic has shaped mad activism throughout its history, and this emerging wave of resistance has begun to confront this impasse directly.

In the first decade of the 21st century, mad activists reinvented psychiatric resistance with a politics that deeply resonated with trends in participatory culture and was supported by a new generation of communications technologies. The Icarus Project, a leading organization at the forefront of this shift, developed hybrid models of peer-support and direct action that were accelerated and amplified by new communicative possibilities. They mobilized around free and open-source communications platforms, and constructed architectures of participation that supported their existing commitments to access, advocacy, transparency, expression, engagement, and community building.

Challenging psychiatric methods and paradigms, questioning the validity of pharmaceutical research, and protesting the political processes that shape mental health policy is nothing new. Activists have struggled for decades (Crossley, 2006_)_, if not centuries (Foucault, 1965; Whitaker, 2003), to resist the imposition of the category of mental illness for the maintenance of hierarchical societies. Even according to historians who contest Foucault's simplistic account of madness in the Middle Ages, as presented in _Madness and Civilization_ (1965), the historical role of mad folk as society's outsiders subjected to the powerful, remains obvious. Erik Midelfort's _A History of Madness in Sixteenth-Century Germany_ emphasizes the real trauma and suffering exhibited by the mad, and the benevolent care afforded them in hospitals modeled on monasteries (Midelfort, 2000). His argument with Foucault over historical specifics does not undermine the general shape of Foucault's argument, namely the identification of 'power' as the mechanism which determines who's mad, and who's sane, even if Foucault's portrayal of the period turns out to be a caricature. Though some of the mad surely suffered, some of those accused of demonic possession and witchcraft were surely undeserving victims. Foucault also recommends studying sites of resistance to better comprehend the machinery and contours of power, a strategy I adopt in this dissertation.

In the modern period, cultural theorists such as Brad Lewis and Jonathan Metzl have exposed the entrenched ideological and commercial interests that aggressively promote the hegemonic narratives that flatten minds into brains and reduce feelings to chemical reactions (Lewis, 2006; Metzl, 2010). In the 1990s, a wave of psychiatric resistance first self-identified as the "Mad Pride" movement emerged, advancing a more nuanced critique of mainstream perspectives on mental illness than earlier generations of anti-psychiatry activists and the consumer/survivor/ex-patient (c/s/x) movements (Coleman, 2008; Morrison, 2005; Crossley, 2006). This emergence marked a break from the orthodox psychiatric survivor movement that came before them.

Like the gay/queer pride movement, whose name and politics directly inspired them, mad pride activists focused more on identity politics than human rights discourses. As the second wave feminists argued, "the personal is political", and this reframing of the issues opened up powerful new avenues of critique (Hanisch, 1969). This new wave of criticism did not entail any particular dogma around hospitalization, medication, or labels, but was rooted in challenging authority and the means by which knowledge is produced (DuBrul, 2012). What has opened up as a result is a whole field of linguistic contestation. The term 'mad pride' is problematic, embraced by some and rejected by others in the movement it for reasons we will explore in Chapter 5. Currently, there is no recognized term identified with the new wing of the movement, aside from the generic "radical mental health" movement.

The radical epistemology captured in the mantra "Nothing about us without us", succinctly represents this unnamed transformative shift (Charlton, 1998). Instead of simply resisting forced drugging and electroshock therapy, this new wave of mad resistance affirms an epistemology that diverges from the conventional medical model. It embraces liberation politics and stages direct actions that attempt to transform the language used to describe the mentally ill. They aspire to develop languages of compassion, celebrate their "dangerous gifts" through creative expression, and facilitate safe spaces for people to share their experiences and subjective narratives. Building on the work of earlier generations of activists who advocated for individual treatment choices and informed consent (Oaks, 2006), they encourage active participation in their healing communities, and insist that their voices and stories be heard and respected alongside those of experts and professionals.

The trope of patient empowerment was forced onto the mainstream agenda through the largely successful activism of the international direct action group, AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP)(Gould, 2009). In the early 80s, when the scourge of AIDS erupted in the United States, the government and pharmaceutical corporations were negligent in responding to the urgent needs of the afflicted. ACT UP formed to demand patient empowerment, and contingents within the group began conducting scientific research, drafting policies and protocols, and ultimately became leading experts on their own condition. They formed their own support groups, pooled their resources to collectively purchase experimental drugs that were not yet approved in the US, and staged vivid protests and direct actions, such as die-ins and the creation of alternative sexual education material. While ACT UP demanded new attention, research and drugs from pharmaceutical industry, and mental health activists are not especially interested in the development of new pharmaceuticals--one might say that they are demanding _less_ attention--there are interesting parallels in the underlying ideology of their demands.

The transformational shift in this emerging wave of resistance can be construed as a shift from advocating for a particular ontology to advocating for a new epistemology. More than a discursive face-off disputing the nature of reality, the disagreement focuses on the question of how to approach controversies and establish consensus. For example, many anti-psychiatrists and psychiatric survivors in the 1970s have argued (and still continue to argue) that there is no such thing as mental illness. I argue that the newly emerging wave of mad resistance operates on a different plane. It is more concerned with insuring that all of the relevant stakeholders have seats at the tables of power, where their voices can be included in the production of psychiatric knowledge. First and foremost is the primacy of their own voices in the understanding of their situation and the co-creation of their stories. Crucially, their insistence on co-constructing their own identities and narratives underlies their platforms, critiques, and actions.

#Medical authorities#

The psychiatric-pharmaceutical establishment rarely acknowledges these challenges to their authority, but their messaging reinforces and relies on the validity of a form of scientific objectivity that can definitely distinguish between sickness and health. Mainstream patient literature often explains mental illness by drawing an analogy between mental illness and diabetes, or other chronic ailments that require medical intervention (National Alliance on Mental Illness, n.d.). This comparison once again advances the notion that patients are sick and there is no lasting cure--only chronic treatments of symptoms requiring lifelong medication, despite many of the documented health risks that psychiatric drugs introduce (Whitaker, 2010).

There are important differences between the diagnoses in the DSM and classic physiological illnesses. First and foremost, many of diagnoses in the DSM lack consensus on whether the conditions described are _illnesses_ deserving medical intervention or _behaviors_ that deviate from societal norms. Furthermore, psychological and emotional distress is incredibly complex and varied, and its causal roots are multivariate and remain shrouded in uncertainty. Many physiological disorders have clearly defined symptoms, whose underlying causes are theoretically grounded in well established models, and can be directly measured. Others, such as Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (Institute of Medicine., 2015), Irritable Bowel Syndrome (Ohman & Simrén, 2010) or Morgellons Syndrome (Pearson et al., 2012) currently defy simple explanation, and Western medicine struggles to treat. Psychiatry's approach towards mental distress more closely resembles the treatment of these poorly understood syndromes than the treatment of the well-defined illness of diabetes. We still don't understand enough about mental distress to compare it with confidence to anything other than another mystery.

Diabetes is a metabolic disorder that is believed, with support from a variety of empirical observations, to be caused when the pancreas fails to create enough insulin to break down glucose, causing increased glucose levels in the blood (American Diabetes Association, n.d.). A network of beliefs and accompanying evidence has confirmed this interpretation of symptoms such as increased thirst, hunger, fatigue, blurred vision and headaches. Psychiatry, on the other hand, is still searching for a causal model, and the DSM's attempts to carve out analytic categories and constructs are regularly called into question. Some argue that many of the diagnoses in the DSM are actually "catch-all" categories. For example, the grab bag of symptoms associated with schizophrenic diagnoses arises from a variety of disparate causes, which may each benefit from differential treatments (Zimney, 2008). Despite investing millions of dollars and decades of research, psychiatric researchers have yet to produce a test validating psychiatric diagnosis (Valenstein, 2002). In 2005 the president of the American Psychiatric Association, Steven Sharfstein, backpedaled on the profession's longstanding claim that mental illnesses are caused by chemical imbalances (Hickey, 2014) and admitted that "brain science has not advanced to the point where scientists or clinicians can point to readily discernible pathologic lesions or genetic abnormalities that in and of themselves serve as reliable or predictive biomarkers of a given mental disorder or mental disorders as a group" (American Psychiatric Association, 2003). The use of the term "readily discernible" hedges the profession's uncertainty about their lack of supporting evidence for the chemical imbalance hypothesis, without disavowing it entirely. As we shall see later, psychiatric researchers have begun to favor the language of "information processing errors" over "chemical imbalance", reflecting the dominant metaphor for understanding brain functions as computations (Rabinbach, 1990). Hickey later wrote that "[psychiatry] must examine the fact that as a profession, we have allowed the biopsychosocial model to become the bio-bio-bio model" (2005).

The biomedical model of emotional distress attempts to definitively state the nature of this distress in objective terms. Many on the receiving end of these diagnoses feel that this claim of objectivity inhibits their ability to locate meaning in their condition by reducing it to a medical label. Despite the widespread claim that labels are purely instrumental, shorthand for doctors to communicate with each other, labels can deeply influence people's identities. Diagnostic labels make some people feel powerless and objectified, like they are "a mood disorder with legs" (Rosenthal, 2010a). There are always elements of a psychological state that cannot be captured by physiological measures. Diagnostic labels often ignore individual and intergenerational trauma, structural oppression and inequality, and a range of social, cultural, political, spiritual and psychological lenses for understanding complex conditions. Some people I met described feeling that labels striped them of their agency, absolving them of responsibility for behaviors associated with their condition, or dooming them to fulfill their diagnosis. The objective authority of labels also discourages people from exploring alternative explanations for their conditions. Language matters in defining the reality of subjective states, and is central in the formation of identity and meaning.

Incorporating a range of diverse stakeholders in the production of psychiatric knowledge would help illuminate the narrowness of current assumptions and give voice to alternative ways to conceptualize and support existential diversity, suffering and crisis. This position does not amount to radical relativism, or endorse the idea that anything goes. Instead, it challenges monocultures of knowledge production and demands that diverse pluralities participate in the judgments that society enforces around values and norms. The systematic denial of the role of value judgments in the production of psychiatric knowledge needs to be interrogated and challenged. The pretense of atheoretical, 'views from nowhere' needs to be exposed, laying bare its underlying biases and ideologies. To be sure, our capacity for reconciling difference is woefully lacking, but the precondition to begin this process starts with listening.

#Transcending dualities#

Critics have engaged the controversies surrounding psychiatric diagnoses on multiple conceptual fronts, provoking debates about the integrity of the rhetoric, science and politics. The work of Stuart Kirk and Herb Kutchins, professors of social work, questions the science, statistics and proofs claimed by the small committee of psychiatric researchers who authored DSM-III and DSM-IIIR. _The Selling of DSM: The Rhetoric of Science in Psychiatry_ (1992), published by an academic press, and _Making Us Crazy: DSM: The Psychiatric Bible and the Creation of Mental Disorders_ (2003), a trade book, expose the workings of these backroom proceedings, and describe their success in transforming psychiatry's central problem from one of "validity" to one of "reliability", the measure of multiple doctors agreeing on the same diagnosis. Reliability is a narrower, technical problem for researchers to solve, one that effectively redefines a diagnosis as valid if multiple doctors agree on the diagnosis. As Bradley Lewis shows in _Moving beyond Prozac_ (2006), the discourses around psychiatric controversies encompass multiple perspectives beyond the rhetorical and scientific. The _rhetorical critiques_ are theory-laden challenges to the ideological frames that are constructed and mobilized to describe the issues. The _scientific critiques_ accept (or bracket) the dominant research paradigms and concentrate on questioning the validity of the research claims, on their own terms. Finally, the _political critiques_ question governance and processes such as the construction of the research agenda, the voices involved in formulating policy recommendations, and the corruption, conflicts of interest and aggressive marketing practices that influence behavior and perception. These dimensions often overlap, and are difficult to disentangle completely in debate or analysis.

The political plane is where questions of diversity and inclusion are activated in the context of crafting a purposeful process for building consensus, resolving conflicts and constructing knowledge. The consideration of politics, in this sense, is largely absent from Kirk and Kutchins' work and is the operating beachhead for the emerging wave of mad resistance I describe in this dissertation.

The new wave of activists I profile often engage these controversies on all of these planes simultaneously, as the assertion "nothing about us without us" embraces a range of rhetorical, scientific and political moves. Their focus on enriching the language we use to describe mental wellbeing and distress represents a deliberate effort to participate in the co-construction of their own reality. Their arguments are often motivated and amplified by dubious science, greedy corporations, and corrupt doctors and policymakers. The emerging wave of mad resistance is fundamentally about applying this political maxim to the full range of psychiatric discourse, and making explicit their demands for a participatory voice.

It is useful to contrast this emerging position with other strands of psychiatric resistance, which often leads to opponents butting heads with little chance for reconciliation. For example, the mind-body problem, a philosophical quandary about the nature of and relationship between the mental and the physical, is one site of rhetorical contention that stands between some psychiatrists and psychiatric survivors. Arguments on both sides of this debate effectively assume dualism, although these are rarely the explicit terms of debate. Dualism is the metaphysical position that postulates that physical and mental phenomena are distinct, though they somehow influence each other. Reductionist psychiatrists cast their arguments in terms implying that the flow of neurotransmitters and the firing of neurons uniquely determine states of mind, but not vice versa. Similarly, the arguments of orthodox anti-psychiatrists suggest that they deny the impact of biochemistry or neurophysiology on their minds, and they vehemently resist any biological explanation of their behavior (with the notable exception of psychiatric drugs, which they blame for detrimental affects on their minds and bodies). These largely unexamined, and, at times, incoherent positions creep into the discourse, even when the participants deny their dualistic dispositions.

A commitment to monism, a theoretical alternative to dualism, presents a substantive challenge to both the orthodox biomedical model of mental illness and orthodox anti-psychiatrists. Monism entails that all behaviors are correlated with corresponding states of mind, and similarly, changes in our brains are also correlated with changes in mind, so that mind and brain are dual aspects of the same phenomena. Unfortunately, the mind-body problem has remained unsolved for millennia, and adopting these positions results in untenable standoffs. Transcending dualism only addresses part of the conflict. To fully embrace a more democratic epistemology, we must also transcend the theoretical questions themselves and pragmatically consider their political implications, bracketing the theoretical frames, for now.

The act of categorizing a state of mind/brain and its corresponding behaviors as pathological is never devoid of subjective inflection and will always involve value judgments and interpretations of behavior that can never isolated in a pure form. While an fMRI image may be used to demonstrate _correlations_ between states of brain and states of mind (crucially, not the necessary consequences of these brain functions), an fMRI will never be able to conclusively demonstrate that a person suffers from a psychiatric disorder. The act of categorizing certain behaviors as deviant or pathological will always involve subjective value judgments. Analytical distinctions carve up the world in particular ways, grouping data together and fitting them to preconceived patterns. Whenever something is counted, something else is omitted, and behavioral descriptions are forever imprisoned in language, comprised of words that are intrinsically bound to shades of semantic senses, embedded in networks of meaning which are inherently social.

Psychiatric facts are inextricably woven among socio-cultural values. A patient, whether treated as a mind, brain, or unified whole, can never be diagnosed independently of our collective judgment of the subject's behavior and disposition. Both minds and brains exist in social entanglements, and divorcing the diagnosis of a patient from his or her psycho-social context effectively locates an individual's pathology inside their skull, without acknowledging the influence and impact of their environment. In theory, a full service treatment team might consider the patient's psycho-social context, but this contextualization is not typical in practice, as market forces, insurance codes and psychiatric cultural norms incentivize diagnoses that are devoid of context. Laboratory diagnostics will never be able to tell us what behaviors to pathologize or determine the threshold for 'normal', since we as a society co-construct these values. Is the patient suffering from a uterine parasite, or blessed with child? Is the patient suffering a psychotic break or struggling to navigate his or her dangerous gifts?

The human condition is richly varied and there are limitless ways for us to find meaning in our experiences. To insist that there is only a single way to make sense of someone's life story requires generous helpings of arrogance and stubbornness (Fadiman, 1997). Once we recognize the inextricable coupling of psychiatric facts with socio-cultural values, the imperative to include more voices in the production of psychiatric knowledge ought to be self-evident. Under the status quo, a small group of primarily white, middle-aged men, most of whom have medical degrees from Western societies, are responsible for defining a normal range of human consciousness, what constitutes healthy experiences, and how to support and treat people who are suffering (Kurt and Kutchins, 1992). They define the parameters of normal and illness through the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), a book whose influence extends far beyond psychiatry, throughout medicine, therapeutic services, insurance claims and health policy. Historically, the team that has drafted this defining document has omitted psychologists, psychoanalysts, social workers, philosophers, humanists, social scientists, patients, families of patients, as well as mental health activists of various stripes (Lewis, 2006). While DSM-IV and 5 committees have made some gestures towards including more mental health professionals outside of psychiatry, as well as minorities and international representation, these additions have been ad-hoc, and not part of a deliberate philosophy of inclusion. It is easy to recognize the fundamental flaws in this arrangement and how diverse perspectives are essential for a more comprehensive and reliable understanding.

The moral imperative for diversity of input is not the only argument for inclusion. Recent sociological findings have demonstrated that diversity enhances organizational creativity and innovation, while homogeneity stifles it (Burt, 2004). Identifying and questioning assumptions, crafting compromises, and designing innovative alternatives are some of the reasons why diversity and inclusion are so important. The mere inclusion of diverse actors does not insure a fair outcome, and processes and procedures must be deliberately adopted which maximize the possibility of fair outcomes. Sometimes positions are irreconcilable, and compromise a Faustian bargain, but the difficulty of achieving absolute fairness should not stop us from trying to improve the current situation.

#Creatively maladjusted#

In the 1960s, the civil rights and anti-war movements challenged authority on multiple fronts, and Martin Luther King, Jr. famously called for his followers to stand maladjusted in order to reveal the madness of an unjust, self-destructive, and irrational society:

Modern psychology has a word that has become common--it is the word maladjusted. We read a great deal about it. It is a ringing cry of modern child psychology; and certainly we all want to live the well adjusted and avoid neurotic and schizophrenic personalities. But I must say to you this evening, my friends, there are some things in our nation and in our world to which I'm proud to be maladjusted. And I call upon you to be maladjusted and all people of good will to be maladjusted to these things until the good society is realized. I never intend to adjust myself to segregation and discrimination. I never intend to become adjusted to religious bigotry. I never intend to adjust myself to economic conditions that will take necessities from the many to give luxuries to the few, and leave millions of people perishing on a lonely island of poverty in the midst of a vast ocean of prosperity. I must honestly say, however much criticism it brings, that I never intend to adjust myself to the madness of militarism, and to the self-defeating effects of physical violence... Yes, I must confess that I believe firmly that our world is in dire need of a new organization – the International Association for the Advancement of Creative Maladjustment... Through such maladjustment we will be able to emerge from the bleak and desolate midnight of man's inhumanity to man, into the bright and glittering daybreak of freedom and justice. (King, 1962)

Widely read critical psychiatrists such as R. D. Laing (1967) and Thomas Szasz (1974) identified the language of 'madness' as an instrument of oppression, and influential academics such as Erving Goffman (1961) and Michel Foucault (1965) wrote extensively about the institutions of psychiatry, their coercive power and histories of abuse. The counter-cultural movements of the 1960s embraced these societal diagnoses and psychiatric critiques that strongly reverberated with their messages of individuation, self-expression, and defiance of established forms of thought.

Over the ensuing decades, a diverse assemblage of organizations continued to actively resist psychiatry. Their positions varied, with an insistence on self-determination, individual freedoms, and a critique of coercion as their common denominator (Morrison, 2006). Some activists claimed that mental illness was a social construct and challenged psychiatry's ontological assumptions, while others accepted psychiatry's diagnoses, but advocated for health insurance parity and consumer rights. Some refuted the therapeutic value of any and all medications, and others struggled to reduce the stigma of mental illness by promoting its biological basis.

In a 2006 article published by the official journal of the American Psychiatric Association, Rissmiller and Rissmiller describe the collapse of the anti-psychiatry movement and its rebirth as the mental health consumer movement:

The formative years of this movement in the United States saw "survivors" promoting their antipsychiatry, self-determination message through small, disconnected groups, including the Insane Liberation Front, the Mental Patients' Liberation project, the Mental Patient's Liberation Front, and the Network Against Psychiatric Assault. The fragmented networks communicated through their annual Conference on Human Rights and Psychiatric Oppression (held from 1973 to 1985), through the ex-patient-run Madness Network News (from 1972 to 1986), and through the annual "Alternatives" conference funded by the National Institute of Mental Health for mental health consumers (from 1985 to the present)... The movement searched for a unifying medium through which to integrate. The growing Internet "global community" offered just such a medium. (2006:865)

Rissmiller and Rissmiller's article generated a strong reaction from the activists they purported to speak for, who contested the article's characterizations and misrepresentations (Oaks, 2006b). In particular, the "psychiatric survivors" did not appreciate being labeled with the marginalizing "anti-psychiatry" moniker, a term they associated with psychiatrists who were critical of psychiatry, and not how they chose to describe themselves. They also refuted the overarching narrative of their movement's collapse in the face of psychiatry's so-called reforms. Rissmiller and Rissmiller exemplify the kinds of moderate, policy-oriented, mainstream activism that psychiatry was willing to engage. This kind of reform is characterized by organizations such as the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI), whose lobbying and advocacy often aligns closely with the Pharmaceutical lobby.

NAMI's anti-stigma campaigns are good examples of this alignment. While reducing stigma around mental diversity is generally a positive development, NAMI's campaigns often come packaged in a suite of frames that promote disease models and pharmaceutical solutions. NAMI's anti-stigma campaigns denounce stigma, but in the same breath also reinforce the idea that patients are sick, there is no definitive cure, and they need to be on drugs for the rest of their lives. Their campaigns seek to medicalize mental distress, and are decidedly "on message" with Pharma's advertising campaigns. On the surface anti-stigma campaigns seem progressive, however, some of the practices they aim to de-stigmatize deserve closer scrutiny. Anti-stigma campaigns often whitewash and legitimize questionable practices under the guise of a progressive cause. Perhaps some conditions ought to be stigmatized? Perhaps treating toddlers with anti-psychotics is something that ought to carry some stigma? The psychiatric survivor movement was not satisfied with NAMI's kinds of reforms. They also denounced stigma, but rejected the language and categories that NAMI's campaigns endorsed.

During this same period, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) published DSM-III (1980), III-R (1987), IV (1994) and IV-TR (2000), grounding their ever-expanding diagnostic nets on what Lewis describes as "an amazingly idealized notion of 'theory neutrality'" (2006: 1). Pharmaceutical companies introduced new therapeutic compounds (Barber, 2008; Whitaker, 2010), and marketed them directly to doctors and consumers on an unprecedented scale (Lane, 2008). Critics of the industry maintained that Big Pharma's business strategy was best understood as the manufacture and marketing of the chronic diseases for which they also sold the treatment (Mills, 2007).

Mindfreedom International (formerly called the Support Coalition International), an important activist watchdog organization dedicated to "a nonviolent revolution in mental health care" (2012), tracked these developments, and engaged in forms of protest using tactics such as civil disobedience, strategic litigation, and generating coverage in the mainstream media. Academic research communities, such as The International Center for the Study of Psychiatry and Psychology (renamed The International Society for Ethical Psychology & Psychiatry in 2011), were "devoted to educating professionals and the public concerning the impact of mental health theories on public policy and the effects of therapeutic practices upon individual well-being, personal freedom, the family, and community values" (2012).

#A method to this madness#

The controversies surrounding the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex are tangled and emotionally charged. I do not intend to resolve them here. What I do insist, along with the new wave of mad resistance, is that the exploration of these questions and controversies should not be reserved to the medical establishment. The traditional human, social, and life sciences can and should bring the full force of their disciplines to bear on these questions. Additionally, media and communications studies are positioned to offer unique and valuable perspectives on these issues (Peters, 2009). The media and communicative environments that we inhabit shape our experiences, perspectives, and behaviors (McLuhan, 1964; Ong, 1982). These environments are undergoing revolutionary changes, and correspondingly, so is identity formation and social interaction (Castells, 1996). James Carey writes that "communication is a symbolic process whereby reality is produced, maintained, repaired, and transformed" (Carey, 1992: 23). Both McLuhan's and Carey's interdisciplinary approaches for studying media and communications as culture suggest a powerful stance for interrogating the representations of pharmaceuticals and mental illness in advertising, popular culture, and the press. McLuhan believed that "ideally, advertising aims at the goal of a programmed harmony among all human impulses and aspirations and endeavors," a claim that applies to psychiatry as easily as advertising (1964: 227). As more authoritative judgments are made through the interpretation of records gathered through institutional surveillance, diagnostic constructs and practices are subtly changing in response to this new form of scrutiny.Psychoactive drugs distort, deflect, and otherwise alter phenomenological experiences in ways that can be productively analyzed as a form of mediation. Just as traditional media mediate communications between senders and receivers, psychoactive drugs modulate cognitive and perceptual apparatuses, and effectively mediate experiences of reality. Like traditional media, these drugs shape our experiences, perspectives, and behaviors – our ways of seeing and being in the world.

Much like familiar elements of our mainstream media ecology such as advertising and the press, psychiatric diagnoses and psychotropic drugs directly mediate and shape our experience of reality. They also, literally, mediate our behaviors, perceptions, desires, and expectations. An entire generation is growing up inhabiting a perpetually drugged-out existence, as their constitutive environment is regulated by drugs that sedate bodies and turn minds sluggish. Our youth's ways of seeing and being in the world are being actively shaped by diagnostic labels and mind-numbing drugs. Scholars, journalists, educators, and activists must work together to marshal all the methods at their disposal to comprehend and contain this burgeoning epidemic, where, by one measure, an astonishing 1 in 5 children are now considered mentally ill (U.S. Surgeon General, 1999).

In this dissertation I tell the story of the emergence and transformation of a new wave of mad resistance. I do not attempt to reproduce the rich scholarship detailing the forms of psychiatric resistance that were prevalent in the second half of the 20th century (Morrison, 2005; Crossley, 2006). Rather, I summarize the salient characteristics of these historical movements in order to contrast them with emerging forms of protest and direct actions imagined and enacted by a new wave of mad resistance born into the networked society of the 1990s and the early twenty-first century.

Coming to terms with a complex domain is a daunting task, for which Plato suggests a concrete methodology: "First, the comprehension of scattered particulars in one idea... Secondly, there is the faculty of division according to the natural idea or members." (Plato, 1999). James Carey articulates a strategy that closely mirrors Plato's in preparation for his analysis of the effects of the telegraph (Carey, 2007). "Concentrate on the effect of the telegraph on ordinary ideas: the coordinates of thought, the natural attitude, practical consciousness... not through frontal assault but, rather, through the detailed investigation of a couple of sites where those effects can be most clearly observed." This style of inquiry provides us with a basis for approaching the analysis of complexity which otherwise appear irreducible or intractable. Throughout this work I will investigate such sites in detail, where the effects I am describing can be most clearly observed.

I approach these sites through a variety of methods, emphasizing ethnographic and participant observer approaches consistent with the inclusive values advocated by the groups I study. Throughout the psychiatric medical literature, patient's voices are systematically omitted, or, at best reduced to survey responses or numerical statistics. Qualitative approaches address this gap in evidence and represent a powerful way to capture a diversity of voices through interpretation and analysis. In an era when "evidence-based" methods have become code for exclusively quantitative methods, it is important to assert and demonstrate the value of rigorous, qualitative social science. Ethnographies are not a substitute for the direct participation of diverse stakeholders in the co-construction of knowledge, but work like this signals an important step in that direction.

I also rely extensively on media content analysis, including mainstream, independent and grassroots. It is important to look at media representations about the activists, as well as ones that ignore or downplay them. It is also vital to learn about these issues and these communities through the stories that the activists themselves tell--about themselves and about the movement. My direct quotation, representation, interpretation, and synthesis of these stories form the core of my contribution to this discourse. My own voice is intermingled with the subjects I represent, in ways that I cannot fully separate. I attempt to indicate my own agendas and biases where possible, but this entire project should be read as my attempt to make sense of the current moment in the psychiatric-pharmaceutical industries, and the counter-cultural movements that resist them. As someone who identifies as both an academic and an activist, I strive to be forthright about my assumptions and convictions. I hope to present an argument that is accessible and convincing beyond the choirs of cultural studies and mad activists.

Due to the sensitive nature of the subject matter, I rely heavily on publicly available primary sources. Despite the fact that many of these activists want to have their stories told, out of respect for their privacy, and in acknowledgement of the practical realities of stigma, I have decided to restrict myself to materials available publically on the web, including mailing lists and forums, unless otherwise noted. Many of the underground materials I draw upon are self-published, and their analysis is largely absent from the scholarly literature. This body of content is vast and difficult to navigate without the kinds of personal guidance and interactions I cultivated in my fieldwork. In each chapter I elaborate on the specific methods used for data collection and analysis. I open my conclusion by detailing my personal account of how I came to this research, and my own direct involvement as an activist within the movement.

Mad activists use communication technologies extensively, and I will consider their usage throughout this analysis as an important substrate of the transformation in mad identity and politics that I trace. James Carey defines "models of communication" as "templates that guide, unavailing or not, concrete processes of human interaction, mass and interpersonal" (1992: 31). The communication models and technologies adopted by a group reflect their strategic, organizing, and decision making cultures (Kavada, 2013). These tools leave traces that provide important clues about the groups' politics and purpose. I do not argue for a causal relationship between these communication technologies and the group's values and organizing principles. The relationship between changes in social movement organizing and the concomitant improvements in communications technologies is undoubtedly complex. In an attempt to avoid simplistic explanations, I will consider the socio-technical environment holistically, without privileging deterministic narratives, or making unwarranted causal claims. Although it is difficult to demonstrate how social movements shape, and are shaped by, revolutions in media and communications technologies, it is interesting and valuable to study how movements leverage technologies, both tactically and strategically.

#Projecting forward#

In chapter 2, I set the stage for this transformation by illustrating dramatic expansions in psychiatry's diagnostic net and increasingly aggressive treatments. In the years leading up to the emergence of this new wave of mad resistance, the psychiatric establishment and the pharmaceutical industry were anything but idle. During this period, the rates of psychiatric diagnoses and treatments rose explosively, and psychiatric drugs became multi-billion-dollar blockbusters and household names.

In this chapter I focus on the story of the explosive rise in pediatric bipolar diagnoses and the emergence of preventative, or prodromal, diagnoses in order to paint a detailed backdrop of the conditions that gave rise to a new wave of mad resistance. The public is vaguely aware of over-diagnosis and over-prescription, but is largely unaware of the extent of the growth in psychiatric diagnosis and treatment. The mainstream media struggles to tell stories about mental health for a variety of reasons, including their exceeding complexity. The psychiatric-pharmaceutical alliance grows relentlessly, and many of their most egregious over-reaches go unnoticed and unchallenged.

In the years leading up to the publication of DSM-5 in 2013, controversies raged around the diagnosis and treatment of behavioral issues in children. The rise of the pediatric bipolar diagnosis, and especially the associated prodromal, or predictive diagnosis, is a case study that exemplifies the ways in which psychiatric judgment has generated controversy among mental health professionals, journalists, activists, and the public. Has the behavior of American youth grown more irritable and defiant, or has the adult judgment of their behavior changed? How can we explain the variations in diagnoses around the globe? Why are similar childhood and adolescent behaviors diagnosed in some settings and not in others? If there is a dramatic shift in youth behavior, what factors and dynamics might be precipitating these changes? How can we effectively study and explain these dramatic transformations in judgment and behavior?

The case studies presented in Chapter 2 intend to provide a detailed examination of an area of dramatic expansion in psychiatric diagnosis and treatment as a window into the machinery of this process more generally. Other areas of diagnostic expansion, such as grief, shyness, anxiety, personality disorders, adult bipolar, psychotic risk, and other lifestyle disorders, vary in the particulars of their expansion, but display similar characteristic and trajectories. The lessons learned from the case of pediatric bipolar provides valuable insights to what is transpiring in the rest of the field.

Through the detailed case study of pediatric bipolar and prodromal diagnoses, Chapter 2 tells the story of the manufacture of a diagnosis and development of psychiatry's alliance with the pharmaceutical industry during the decade leading up to the release of DSM 5. During this period, we also witnessed a pronounced transformation in mad activism, towards a new wave focused on asserting and demanding a voice. To demonstrate this trend I closely example two separate sites where we witness non-credentialed stakeholders being systematically marginalized and silenced.

In Chapter 3 I present the fieldwork I conducted in Zuccotti Park during the Occupy Wall Street protests. The first section of this chapter analyzes my experiences participating in OWS's "Support" working group, a group primarily composed of professional social workers, along with a few psychologists, psychiatrists, chaplains and others. Even among the liberal, progressive and radical activists in Zuccotti, radical mental health activists struggled to be heard. The non-credentialed peers faced systematic hurdles in voicing their concerns, and in many instances they felt silenced and marginalized by the professionals. In the second section of this chapter I analyze the collaborative production of _Mindful Occupation: Rising up Without Burning out_, a book that was the product of over fifty contributors, created by and for the Occupy Wall Street activists. I played a central role contributing to and organizing the production of this work and the contributors collaborating on _Mindful Occupation_ included radical mental health activists as well as mental health professionals. The book's content, as well as the controversies that erupted during its editing clearly illustrate this new wave of mad politics, articulated through their approach towards consensus and conflict resolution. Taken together, the contrast between conflict resolution in the Support meetings and the editing of _Mindful Occupation_ provide a thick study of authority and knowledge production around mental health in Zuccotti Park, and demonstrates the urgency for mad activists to advocate for their right to participate directly in the creation of systems governing their classification and support.

Following a similar trajectory, Chapter 4 turns to the May 2012 American Psychiatric Association conference, held in Philadelphia. The conference previewed a draft of the controversial DSM-5, which was published the following year in 2013. A surge of activists and media converged on Philadelphia for the landmark unveiling of psychiatry's defining document. I attended activists' rallies and marches, official conference talks and poster sessions, and also witnessed a historic meeting of the Radical Psychiatric Caucus, whose members had invited activists and the media to participate in their yearly meeting. I closely analyze the speeches from the rallies, where I tease out evidence of the new wave of mad resistance, appearing side-by-side with its more orthodox c/s/x precursors. The two-hour meeting between the self-proclaimed radical psychiatrists and the mental health activists was filled with fire and vitriol. At one point, an activist slammed his hands on the table, donned a red clown nose, and rose to sing an anti-fascist protest song. Clearly, the constituencies were having great difficulty communicating. As with the professional mental health workers at Occupy Wall Street, even the "radical" psychiatrists had a difficult time truly listening to the mad activists--stakeholders without credentials.

After demonstrating in Chapters 3 and 4 that the mad resistance is desperately struggling to be heard, even among the most liberal, progressive and radical contingents, I turn to the question--What would we hear if we listened? What have they been saying for the better part of a decade? Aspects of this new wave of messaging appeared throughout chapters 2-4, but in Chapter 5 I knit together these threads to examine the history, culture and ideology of The Icarus Project, a pivotal grassroots organization founded in 2002 that is at the forefront of reimagining community-driven mental health activism. The Icarus Project is the organization where my fieldwork was rooted, and both within and beyond the mad movement they are considered the avant-garde of mad activism. The Icarus project exists at the intersection of peer-support, activism, and media production and their birth coincided with the beginning of the Web 2.0 era, the rise of participatory culture and the popularization of digital networked activism. After twelve years of publishing books, films and artwork, hosting voluminous discussion boards and events, this chapter attempts to answer the question--What did The Icarus Project say? I attempt to answer this question by drawing on primary source materials. I examine the media that The Icarus Project and its membership have produced and published, alongside a detailed history of media coverage and an analysis of their communication infrastructure. I will describe how they have utilized digital media and web platforms to help diffuse stigma, redefine personal identity, and resist the relentless advance of the biomedical model of psychiatry. I will demonstrate that their evolving organizational model--whose genealogy can be traced through anarchism, punk, queer pride, harm reduction ("policies, programs and practices that aim primarily to reduce the adverse health, social and economic consequences of the use of legal and illegal psychoactive drugs without necessarily reducing drug consumption" (Harm Reduction International. (n.d.)) and permaculture ("a philosophy of working with, rather than against nature" (Mollison, 1997))--has informed their adoption of media and communication tools, and given rise to new forms of collective action.

I conclude by examining how mainstream psychiatry itself is under attack from forces within the scientific establishment who question the biochemical model of illness and the utility of the DSM. This dispute poses a challenge for mad activism, too. The activists' messaging must adapt to these changes to remain relevant. Psychiatry is at a critical juncture, and many of the shifts underway challenge the mad movement's goals amid an extraordinary growth in psychiatric and pharmaceutical power. By studying cases that illuminate psychiatry's shifting boundaries we can gain more insight into the movement's ideology and recommend directions for future advocacy. We will see that the wave of mad resistance that I identify in this project is still nascent. It exists in an inchoate form, but has not yet been fully actualized. It is still searching for language and leadership to crystallize its vision, mobilize a broader constituency, and find solidarity with other anti-oppression movements involving, for example, prisoners, veterans, seniors, child advocates and the larger disability rights movement, all of which will be essential for the movement to flourish and prevail.