\chapter{APA 2012: Oppositionally defiant protestors and the radical caucus}\label{chapter-four}

\cleanchapterquote{The most intense conflicts, if overcome, leave behind a sense of security and calm that is not easily disturbed. It is just these intense conflicts and their conflagration which are needed to produce valuable and lasting results.}{Carl Jung}{Some Book} 

On May 5, 2012 over 10,000 members of the American Psychiatric Association converged on Philadelphia's Convention Center for their annual meeting (Burling, 2012). The official theme for 2012's annual conference was "integrated care", but the unofficial theme dominating the conference presentations and media coverage was the formal unveiling of the DSM-5 draft. Since the publication of the first edition of the manual in 1952 (American Psychiatric Association), the DSM has been the subject of perpetual controversy, and the DSM-5 in particular has generated more debate than any of versions preceding it. Alongside the regular attendees, journalists flocked to the APA to cover this event, and mental health activists descended to express their dissatisfaction and outrage.

I traveled to Philadelphia to participate in the protests and observe the protesters' presentations. I also spent a full day attending the APA conference, listened to a few talks, visited the poster sessions, and explored the exhibition hall. I engaged in many conversations with protestors, journalists, researchers and psychiatrists about the DSM, focusing on the most controversial diagnoses like pediatric bipolar and psychotic risk syndrome. I left Philadelphia with a newfound appreciation for the immense scale of the system the protesters were struggling against, and a fresh perspective for how many psychiatrists were also critical of the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex.

I also witnessed confirmation of this dissertation's central contentions. First, there was an evident contrast between the established anti-psychiatry/psychiatric survivor movements and a new wave of mad activists. The contrast was at times subtle, as some activists with a history of advocating in a more traditional, dogmatic style had refreshed their rhetoric and nuanced their message to be more inclusive. At other times the contrast was quite stark. There were few sparks of contention between these two camps since their strategic interests intersected, however, their differences surfaced in their tactical priorities and were visible when their messages collided.

Second, the urgency of advocating for patient empowerment and a stronger voice in the co-construction of psychiatric knowledge was clearly visible in a dramatic meeting which included the protesters and a group of psychiatrists who self-identified as the "Radical Caucus". In the last chapter we witnessed how difficult it was for those without professional mental health credentials to assert their voices and be heard by mental health professionals. The mental health professionals organizing in Zuccotti Park are among the most progressive and liberal mental health professionals practicing in New York. Similarly, the psychiatrists who are members of the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) Radical Caucus self-identify as radical and, along with a few other groups (e.g. The International Society for Ethical Psychology & Psychiatry (ISEPP) and American Association of Community Psychiatry (AACP)), are ostensibly the most vocal critics of the psychiatry from within the US establishment. These groups are most likely to be receptive to the needs and concerns of the protestors, and their negative reactions suggest how difficult it is for mad activists to find mainstream allies. Both in the Occupy Support group and the APA Radical Caucus the voices and concerns of the patients, peers, and non-credentialed advocates were systematically stifled and marginalized. If these actors are treated this way within sympathetic circles of allies, it is disconcerting to extrapolate the attitude of the mainstream psychiatric establishment.

#A Pivotal Moment#

The 2012 APA protest captured a pivotal moment in history of the mental health movement. The year leading up to this event witnessed a number of factors that increased participation and amplified the energy of the protests. In the months preceding the 2012 APA protest, the Occupy movement erupted, and activists, representing a range of causes, piggybacked on the movement's visibility and enthusiasm to mobilize support around their issues. As we saw in the last chapter, mad activists were among those energized by Occupy, and the language of Occupy spilled over to the APA protests, which were sometimes branded "Occupy APA".

The year also witnessed some high profile critiques of the profession of psychiatry, including Marcia Angell's favorable reviews of _The Emperor's New Drugs: Exploding the Antidepressant Myth_(Kirsch, 2010), _Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric Drugs, and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in America_(Whitaker, 2010) and _Unhinged: The Trouble With Psychiatry---A Doctor's Revelations About a Profession in Crisis_ (Carlat, 2010) in the New York Review of Books (2011). A number of documentary film projects engaging the issues of mental health and corruption in the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex entered production around this time, and some of these filmmakers documented the APA protests. In 2012 The Icarus Project turned 10, signifying the sustainability and staying power of the organization. And the APA protests in May 2012, would turn out to be one the last public protests led by David Oaks, the founder and longtime head of Mindfreedom and an important leader in the mad movement, for he would suffer a serious spinal chord injury in December 2012 that would severely limited his later capacity for organizing. The APA protest thus marks a changing of the generational guard.

Most significantly, the 2012 APA marked the release of the DSM-5 proposal, the culmination of 12 years of work following a process riddled with public controversy. With this release the APA switched from using Roman numerals to Arabic numerals in anticipation of the need to clearly indicate future versions and point releases. One of the most vocal and prominent critics of the DSM-5 included Dr. Allen Frances, the head of the DSM-IV task force. Frances received his MD from the Downstate Medical Center in 1967 and a certificate in psychoanalytic medicine from Columbia University's Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research in 1978. He served as the chairman of the department of psychiatry at Duke University's School of Medicine and was the founding editor of two prominent psychiatric journals. Frances authored a series of articles starting in March 2010 on the _Psychology Today_ blog called "DSM 5 in Distress" which later led to the publication in May 2013 of his bestselling book _Saving Normal: An Insider's Revolt Against Out-of-Control Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-5, Big Pharma, and the Medicalization of Ordinary Life_. Mainstream media outlets in print (New York Times (Satel, 2013), the Wall Street Journal (Tavris, 2013), the Washington Post (Petri, 2013)), radio (NPR (Flatow, 2013), and television news (NBC (Nash, 2013), ABC (Moisse, 2012), CBS (Jaslow and Castillo, 2013), Fox (Grush, 2013)) all covered the DSM's new release, and reported on the controversy surrounding it. Debates raged over topics such as the elimination of the bereavement exclusion for diagnosing clinical depression, the consolidation and tightening definitions around autism-related diagnoses, and the diagnosis of behavioral disorders in children such as pediatric bipolar, oppositional defiance disorder, and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.

After DSM-5's unveiling at the 2012 APA, an open letter was drafted and endorsed by more than 50 Mental Health Organizations, and signed by over 15 thousand people, including psychiatrists, other mental health professionals, patients, and activists. The supporting organizations included numerous divisions of the American Psychological Association, alongside psychoanalytic and counseling associations. The signatories included strong representation from professional associations focused on minority issues, such as women, LGBT, African-American and Latino, as well as international support from associations in Britain, Denmark, India and Italy. The petition raised a number of concerns about the DSM-5 proposal relating to both the substantive content of the proposal as well as the process around its drafting.

>Our three primary concerns in the letter were as follows: the DSM–5 proposals appear to lower diagnostic thresholds, expanding the purview of mental disorder to include normative reactions to life events; some new proposals (e.g., "Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder" and "Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome") seem to lack the empirical grounding necessary for inclusion in a scientific taxonomy; newly proposed disorders are particularly likely to be diagnosed in vulnerable populations, such as children and the elderly, for whom the over-prescription of powerful psychiatric drugs is already a growing nationwide problem; and the increased emphasis on medico-biological theories for mental disorder despite the fact that recent research strongly points to multifactorial etiologies (Coalition for DSM-5 Reform, 2012).

Regarding the drafting process, the letter also criticized the DSM-5 task force for delays, for cancelling field trials and forensic reviews, and for hiring a public relations firm to manage the brewing controversies. Most damning, the letter sharply criticized the task force for releasing a manual with such low reliability. Reliability is a statistical measure of different doctors' agreement on a diagnosis when presented with the same set of symptoms. Frances interprets and historicizes the papers published (Clarke, 2013; Regier, 2013; Narrow, 2013) by the DSM-5 leadership reporting the results of its field trial, in what he describes as a "distressingly misleading paper":

>According to the authors, 14 of the 23 disorders had "very good" or "good" reliability; 6 had questionable, but 'acceptable' levels; and just three had "unacceptable" rates. Sounds okay until you look at the actual data and discover that the cheerful words used by the DSM-5 leaders simply don't fit their extremely disappointing results. The paper is a classic example of Orwellian 'newspeak'. When DSM-5 failed to achieve acceptable reliability by historical standards, the DSM-5 leadership arbitrarily decided to move the goal posts in and lower the bar in defining what is 'acceptable'.... DSM-5 cheapens the coinage of reliability by hyping these merely 'okay' levels as 'very good'. Then it gets much worse... 9 DSM-5 disorders... previously would have been considered just plain 'poor', but DSM-5 puffs these up as 'good'. Then DSM-5 has the chutzpah to call acceptable the 6 disorders that achieved lousy, absolutely unacceptable reliabilities.... DSM-5 finally finds unacceptable... 3 diagnoses... (which is barely better than chance). (Frances, 2012)

The DSM-5's release in 2013 also prompted the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the federal agency which funds over $1.5 billion yearly in psychiatric research, to disavow the work. In a press release issued on April 29, 2013, Tom Insel, the director of the NIMH, wrote that the NIMH would be "re-orienting its research away from DSM categories. Going forward, we will be supporting research projects that look across current categories – or sub-divide current categories – to begin to develop a better system." (Insel, 2013). Insel continues to critique the reliability and validity of the DSM with a surprising statement that ironically validates the longstanding position of many anti-psychiatrists. The NIMH's position sounds remarkably similar to the claim of activists and critical scholars that the diagnoses defined in the DSM are socially constructed:

>While DSM has been described as a "Bible" for the field, it is, at best, a dictionary, creating a set of labels and defining each. The strength of each of the editions of DSM has been "reliability" – each edition has ensured that clinicians use the same terms in the same ways. The weakness is its lack of validity. Unlike our definitions of ischemic heart disease, lymphoma, or AIDS, the DSM diagnoses are based on a consensus about clusters of clinical symptoms, not any objective laboratory measure.

Insel has also gone on record validating another longtime contention of anti-psychiatry, questioning the scientific evidence for "chemical imbalance" as the causal mechanism underlying mental illness. In a front page story in the Philadelphia Inquirer leading up to the APA conference on May 5, 2012, Insel is quoted saying: "There is no biochemical imbalance that we have ever been able to demonstrate. What we think about are changes in circuitry and how the brain is processing information." (Burling, 2012)

I will return to the implications of Insel's declaration, on both psychiatry and the mad movement, in my conclusion. In this chapter we will focus on how these pent-up forces were unleashed in Philadelphia, in a moment that was primed for transformation and high drama.

#The Friends Center#

At 10am on Saturday morning, a protest rally preceding the march was held in the Quaker-run Friends Center in downtown Philadelphia. Over a hundred protesters were seated in the pews of the chapel, surrounded by large signs with protest slogans arrayed along the walls. The morning talks were well planned and followed a printed program of speakers. A microphone was set up at the front of the room and Caitlan Belforti, an articulate college activist, actress and poet in her early twenties, introduced the speakers who were each given seven minutes to talk.

Protestors ranged in ages from teenagers to senior citizens, and came from across the United States. The march was organized my Mind Freedom International, based in Portland, Oregon, and a number of representatives from the pacific northwest had travelled to Philly to help organize the event. Jim Gottstein, a mental health advocacy lawyer and the founder of Psych Rights traveled from Fairbanks, Alaska to join the protest. He brought T-shirts and signs with an image of Lucy from Peanuts waiting idly for patients with a sign over her head reading "Psychiatric "Help" ~~5~~~~ ¢~~$500' and the caption---The doctor was A) Fooled B) Complicit". There were also many representatives from the North-East, including a full bus of activists from upstate New York who were involved in organizing around mental health and prison issues, a contingent from New England, where a growing community has formed around the popular blog _Mad in America_, named after Robert Whitaker's 2010 book investigating scientific cover-ups in the pharmaceutical industry and a history of the mistreatment of the mentally ill in 20th century America (Whitaker, 2010). Activists also carpooled from the South, driving from as far as Virginia, North Carolina and Louisiana.

Belforti introduced most of the speakers by stating their ages, organizational affiliations, and for most, their earliest encounters with the psychiatric system. The majority of the speakers began their speeches by sharing their personal experiences with psychiatry and, in most cases, their disengagement from the system through the rejection of diagnoses and/or psychiatric medications. Many were also quite accomplished in their fields, and the speaker lineup included community organizers, lawyers, PhDs, and mental health professionals.

The theme of the rally was a critique of the DSM-5, and in particular the dehumanizing effect of labels and diagnoses. Popular rallying cries also included a shared outrage at forced drugging and electroshock treatment, along with the growing trend of diagnosing and drugging children. The morning speakers rarely formulated their critiques in the language of orthodox anti-psychiatry, and few categorically denied the existence of mental illness or condemned the use of psychiatric medications outright. The leadership of the movement went to great lengths to be inclusive of those who decide to take medication, and was deliberate about saying so. Nonetheless, at times their inclusiveness sounded half-hearted and condescending, with a tone that suggested that anyone who was fully informed would opt for alternatives.

The APA protest rally featured orthodox anti-psychiatrists /psychiatric survivors alongside the emerging wave of mental health activists demanding participation, empowerment, and authorship of their own narratives. The dogmatic sentiments of the old guard are evident in the writings of contemporary anti-psychiatrists such as Peter Breggin (1991), Seth Farber (2013) and Bonnie Burstow (2015). Breggin, a practicing psychiatrist has published numerous books and articles critical of psychiatry, and in particular, argues against the use of psychiatric medications and ECT under almost any circumstance. In the tradition of R.D. Laing, he blames patient's families for their suffering, and prescribes empathy and love instead of drugs. Farber is a psychologist who argues that mad folk are fundamentally misunderstood by society and represent the spiritual vanguard who will help usher in a messianic era. Burstow is a feminist therapist and on the faculty of education at the University of Toronto. She describes herself as an "abolitionist" and argues that the institution of psychiatry is fundamentally corrupt and beyond reform. She calls for replacing it with peer-to-peer social services, and condemns all psychiatric drugs as brain damaging, masking the very dysfunctions they create.

Organizations such as Mind Freedom International are strongly rooted in the politics of orthodox anti-psychiatry, denying the existence of mental illness and demonizing the entire field of psychiatry. Traces of these sentiments appear throughout the morning speeches. To my ears, the tension between the old and the new is audible whenever I encounter the categorical assertions condemning the entire practice of psychiatry, devoid of context. When activists make normative claims about how other patients should narrate their experiences, they expose themselves to the same critique that the emerging wave of criticism has leveled against the psychiatric establishment. Specifically, the arguments for patient/consumer/survivor self-determination and empowerment apply equally to the forcefulness of both the psychiatric and anti-psychiatric establishments. Neither psychiatry nor anti-psychiatry can speak exclusively on behalf of the individual, construct their identity, or write their narrative for them. The kind of participation that the new wave of mental health activists are advocating for includes demanding a voice, as well as listening to all of the actors involved in a controversy, and not obliterating their perspective by shouting over them or ignoring them. When anti-psychiatrists refute the positive experiences of people who find support in professional mental health treatment, they are guilty of privileging their own interpretation of reality and dictating other people's narratives.

Consider the speech of Laura Delano, a sharp, energetic young woman in her early thirties who identifies as a psychiatric-survivor, works as a peer-specialist, and is an active blogger and editor for _Mad in America_. Laura was diagnosed with major depression at 14, bipolar at 18, and was "struggling to manage life instead of living it" until 27, when she shed her labels and meds. Her speech at the rally was impassioned and authentic, and she choked back tears as she defiantly relayed her personal story of recovery.

>The profound anger I have today for those still labeled, and those still trapped within the biomedical paradigm of psychiatry, is a healthy one that fuels me and motivates me to do whatever I can to make a change... It is one of the greatest existential insults to slap a biomedical label onto the experience of being an emotive human being, no matter how well intentioned the labeler may be... If you are here today and believe that the speech I just gave of how mentally ill I am, I respect your right to believe what you want and only ask that you keep an open mind and an open heart to what we have to say today. If you are here today and have freed yourself from psychiatric labels, I send you a deep and loving congratulations. If you are here today, still enslaved by your labels and the treatment they require, and want liberation, join this movement and find your path towards recovery. We are here waiting for you to walk together with you towards equality and justice for everyone, regardless of how uniquely each of us experiences this complicated and painful unbelievably beautiful thing we call life. (Delano, 2012)

Contrast Delano's statement with that of Aki Imai. Imai is a 25 year old student of clinical psychiatry who collaborated on the Mindful Occupation zine, and also started the submission-based blog, "Life after Labels". "Life after Labels" was modeled on the very popular "It Gets Better" campaign, which encouraged LGBT adults to create short personal video messages of support directed at LGBT youth (It Gets Better Project, (n.d.)). The "It Gets Better" project was started in Sept 2010 by the syndicated columnist and author Dan Savage. Savage created a YouTube video to telegraph messages of hope to young people facing harassment after a string of LGBT bullying incidents. The video went viral and helped spawn a global movement, inspiring 50,000 video messages that have been viewed over 50 million times. Imai was inspired by this project and started "Life after Labels," soliciting short, first person text or video accounts of recovery. In describing his motivation for creating this site, Imai explains:

>I wanted to help people find hope... and present a challenge against DSM. The DSM steals authorship from our own life stories. Suddenly your story doesn't matter anymore. You are reduced into symptoms, and consequently a label... I'm not saying that the label itself is a bad thing. I don't have a problem if you like the label, or if you don't like the label... 'When I want to know what misogyny is, I don't ask a man. When I want to know what racism is, I don't ask a white person. When I want to know what homophobia is, I don't ask a heterosexual. When I want to know what transphobia is, I don't ask a cisgender person. When I want to know what ableism is, I don't ask an able-bodied person. If you want to understand the experience of the oppressed, the conditions of oppression are best articulated by the oppressed.' So, likewise if you want to understand experience of those with psychological distress, you do not ask people who are not experiencing psychological distress. You do not ask people who are trying to categorize personal experiences into cookie cutter definitions... This is also to make a statement that we do not need to rely on a hegemonic, aggressive system to manage us, but we can take care of each other. To take co-authorship in a movement, where we can take authorship of our lifestories back from the DSM, and back into our lives.

Although both Delano and Imai express similar sentiments, the difference between their arguments is both subtle and crucial. For Delano, "enslavement" comes with the diagnostic label itself, and the biomedical model it's associated with. For Imai, "oppression" comes from act of being labeled by an external authority, powerless to label yourself, even if you ultimately choose label yourself according to the diagnostic categories of the DSM. For Delano, there is no true recovery or liberation within the paradigm of the biomedical model, while for Imai the essential question is one of "authorship" of one's identity and life story. For Imai, someone who choses to identify themselves with a DSM label is not oppressed while Delano believes DSM labels are inherently oppressive, regardless of who assigns them. These two speeches encapsulate much of the shift from orthodox anti-psychiatry to the emerging wave of mad resistance.

For years, critics of anti-psychiatry have expressed concern that the movement romanticizes suffering and doesn't acknowledge the agency of those who self-identify as mentally ill (Jamison, 1997; Styron, 1992). Orthodox anti-psychiatrists argue that anyone who considers himself or herself sick is ignorant or deluded by the false paradigms promoted by psychiatry. Imai's formulation captures an alternative position, one that emphasizes agency, empowerment, participation, and self-determination.

This position is also evident in the protest's most visible direct action, the "label ripping" ceremony conducted Saturday afternoon in front of the Philadelphia convention center. Faith Rhyne, a co-organizer of the protest, described the action at the morning rally at the Friend's Center. Rhyne lives in North Carolina and is a brilliant and prolific artist and writer, as well as a peer-counselor and mental health community organizer. Rhyne explained:

>We're going to do a ceremony today as we protest the APA and the DSM-5... We're going to rip up some labels. We've got labels that say "Not OK"... "Sick". "Chemically imbalanced". "Psychotic". "Sczophenric". "Bipolar". "Borderline". "Depressed". We've got those labels. We've got about 500 of them... So, we're going to be rallying some folks up there at the protest -- we can hand you some labels... and, we can tear them up. People are going to be filming. We encourage people to make a statement. Tear up the label that you were given, and state yourself as how you believe yourself to be. We all believe the most basic human right is the right to define our own experiences in ways that uplift us and nurture what is best and most true about ourselves, as we have identified it.

Notably, the pre-printed labels included DSM diagnoses as well as more generic labels like "Not OK" or "Chemically Imbalanced". These labels refute the clinical gaze and the act of labeling, in addition to specific DSM diagnoses. Crucially, the label ripping ceremony was followed by an assertive proclamation by the protestor of how they prefer to identify themselves, which was captured on video, posted on YouTube, and circulated on social media. Rhyne also described her experience with being labeled:

>Philadelphia inquirer covered this event on their front page - the head of the APA responded... with the statement – "a label may save a life". That was not my experience. Nor has it been the experience of many, many people that I know love and support. What I found was that receiving my label when I did robbed me of my life. Robbed me of my potential of my understanding of myself. And I lived under those lies.

Without over-analyzing any particular formulation or turn of phrase, it is worth noting that Rhyne habitually "speaks from the I". Delano states: "It is one of the greatest existential insults to slap a biomedical label onto the experience of being an emotive human being", an argument formulated in a passive voice, which categorically applies to all of humanity. By contrast, Rhyne roots her argument in her own direct experience, and the experiences of her friends and loved ones. This pattern of speech is indicative of the ideology that underlies the shift I am describing---a shift from universal imperatives and towards a recognition and respect for subjective experience and its bearing on knowledge.

#We are the 100%#

The speeches at the Friend Center rally engaged in many issues beyond identity politics, labeling, and the DSM. The movement's leadership illustrated some of the other concerns permeating the atmosphere. They raised policy issues including forced outpatient treatment, regulatory reform of the FDA and excessive drugging of prisoners and foster children. Overarching critiques of the system overlapped with critiques of an individual's choice to embrace the language and tools of psychiatry, since the policies are written using language inherently oppressive to many of the activists.

Lauren Tenney is a professor of environmental psychology at CUNY who was institutionalized at 15. She is now a leading human rights activist who identifies as a psychiatric survivor. In her speech she accused psychiatry of murder, torture and slavery. She characterized psychiatry's actions as "absolutely inhumane and torturous". Citing research that shows that psychiatric drugging can lead to a 25-30 year loss of life, she equated forced drugging with "murder". Finally, she argued that state-ordered treatment programs prevent people from working in their preferred job, forcing them to work in others, which she equated with "slavery".

Tenney's accusations captured the rage and frustration felt by many in the room towards the psychiatric establishment. She is a young organizer, in her early thirties, who has devoted herself to the struggle against forced electroshock, drugging, and coercion. Her rhetoric is typical of a fiery protest speech, and was met with cheers and applause. It is worth noting the raw emotional outrage contained in these accusations, and the great chasm that was bridged when a group of psychiatrists invited these activists to their meeting later that weekend. Tenney was careful to blame organizations and structural forces, although she called for holding individuals accountable for these systemic human rights violations.

Jim Gottstein is an attorney, a psychiatric survivor, and founder of PsychRights. He is a long-time advocate for the mentally ill who regularly goes to court defending patients and prisoners in Alaska from forced psychiatric treatment. In 2008 he filed suit against then Gov. Sarah Palin seeking to stop the forced medication of children in foster homes and juvenile detention centers. The suit was dismissed a year later when the court decided that PsychRights lacked standing, but Gottstein has continued to champion the rights of children and prisoners. Gottstein lays out a series of structural and policy issues and demands reform and accountability.

Gottstein stressed the role of the movement in piercing the "veil of lies about [the psychiatric industry] practices and the great harm it causes", and called on the crowd to spread the word about "the great physical carnage" psychiatry causes which prevents people from getting "their lives back on track". He raised the issue of court-ordered shock therapy against the will of the patient, the "horror of the massive psychiatric drugging of poor children on Medicaid", and the drugging of infants, which he claimed was mostly illegal. He called on the crowd to counter the "power of the psycho-pharmaceutical complex" by "exercising... the power of the people". Regarding DSM-5, he argued that "psychiatry uses dubious labels to drive up drug sales, lock people up, and force them to endure harmful counterproductive drugs and electroshock against their will." He implored the protesters to "stand against this", especially since the "prospective fifth edition of the diagnostic and statistical manual will make this even worse". Gottstein concluded by acknowledging that the people at the rally are "the lucky ones" whow are "not locked up by psychiatry", unlike those "so debilitated by the drugs that [they] couldn't come." He charged the crowd with the task of with speaking for those who are "so debilitated by the drugs that they can't speak up for themselves."

In the course of his systematic condemnation of psychiatry Gottstein pays lip service to respecting adults who choose to take psychiatric medications. "Now, I do know people who find their psychiatric medications helpful, adults, and they should be available to adults who want them. At the same time, they should be told the truth about them, including that there are other approaches that work for many people far better and without the tremendous harm caused by the drugs." However, the tone of his delivery is grudging. His categorical condemnation of psychiatric drugs and the harm they cause is an attitude that continues to alienate many people struggling with emotional crises who choose to use psychiatric medication. The distinction between Gottstein's position and more inclusive declarations is often subtle, and more a matter of tone than precise wording.

Informed consent is the standard that the Icarus Project clings to, but it is a difficult standard to meet. Information about the risks of psychiatric medication is hard to come by, and consent is hard to obtain from children, prisoners, and seniors with Alzheimer's or dementia. However, contrast Gottstein's phrasing with the more welcoming and inclusive language of The Icarus Project. Icarus meetings always start with a preamble, which includes the following statement:

>This is a space for people to come together and learn from each other's different views and experiences of madness. People who take psychiatric drugs are welcome here, as are people who don't take psychiatric drugs. People who use diagnosis categories to describe themselves are welcome, as are people who define themselves differently. The Icarus Project values self-determination and mutual support.

The Icarus Project and the Freedom Center has jointly published the _Harm Reduction Guide to Coming off of Psychiatric Drugs_, explaining that a "harm reduction" approach "means not being pro- or anti- medication, but supporting people where they are at to make their own decisions, balancing the risks and benefits involved." (Hall, 2007). The horrors and abuses of the psychiatric system are very real, but the reaction to these horrors has created an environment that is sometimes hostile and stigmatizing to those who have chosen to incorporate psychiatric medications into their treatment regiment. Unlike orthodox anti-psychiatrists like Breggin or Burstow, Gottstein doesn't reject psychiatric medications outright, but his tone and body language betray his sentiments, and helped foster an atmosphere that many who identify with the emerging wave of mad pride activists find discomforting.

Finally, David Oaks, the founder of Mindfreedom and one of the main co-organizers of the protest, spoke for more than ten minutes. He compared the movement to the anti-slavery movement and called for the creation of a modern-day underground railroad to save people from involuntary outpatient commitment and forced outpatient drugging. He spoke of the need for a "non-violent revolution" and claimed that the mad movement represented "the 100%" of humanity. Oaks regularly draws inspiration from the civil rights movement, and has worked hard over the years to craft his message to be more inclusive. Oaks graduated from Harvard in 1977, where was institutionalized five times during his undergraduate years (Neil, 1983). He wrote his senior thesis about the Mental Patients Liberation Front, and credits them with teaching him about "backpacking, friendship, anti-sexism, radical politics, community organizing, grant writing, press releases, dealing with the press, handling meetings, finding that trusted people can filch from the treasury" (p. 28). At the morning rally, he was greeted with loud applause and remarked:

>We are unstoppable. We are the 100%. We are the human spirit... But really what we are saying is that this is about being human. This is about pathologizing being human. To be human is to have extreme states. To be human is to wrestle with overwhelm. To be human is not to have a grip on reality. To be human is to be unique and different. This is about the human spirit, and that's why we're going to win.... [The APA has] extreme mental and emotional problems.... We need to put some psychiatrists in prison.... We really are pro-choice. If you make the personal decision to take a substance as part of your recovery, that is your personal decision... Don't let them pigeonhole us, as in some kind of civil war between drugs and talk. Now, that's too simple.

Mindfreedom International, the organization founded by Oaks in 1990, includes many members who self-identify as psychiatric survivors and anti-psychiatrists. Over the years Oaks has actively modified and softened his language, and his position has shifted to become more inclusive, embodying the movement's emerging values. By 2006, Oaks was saying, "our social change movement must avoid the blind alley of fighting over an individual's personal and private choices." (Oaks, 2006a)

Many sub-networks of psychiatric survivors I encountered insulate themselves within ideological monocultures that mirror psychiatry's monocultures. It is hard for these survivors to acknowledge that psychiatrists or drugs ever help anyone, and they systematically block out or refute all testimony to the contrary. These attitudes parallel the psychiatric monocultures that dogmatically deny psychiatry's harm, see biological sickness and disease wherever they look, and push pharmaceuticals as first line treatment. These positions may sound like straw man arguments, but they currently dominate too much of the debate.

The rally at the Friends Center was powerful and emotional, and set the tone for the rest of the weekend's protest. The format of the rally encouraged speakers to share their personal stories, and many opened their talks with intimate accounts of their experiences with psychiatry and emotional crises. The poignancy of their speeches helps us understand the tension and abrasive exchanges that developed in the Radical Caucus.

#Hey, Hey APA!#

After the rally the protestors assembled in the Friends Center courtyard exchanging greetings, drawing last-minute protest signs and preparing for the march. One of my favorite signs read "Oppositionally Defiant Sign". One of the organizers distributed T-shirts with a dazed and doped cartoon figure, emblazoned with the word – Psychopharmacopia. On the back the term was defined:

>Psychopharmacomania is a mental or emotional disorder caused by ingestion of too much end product of the psychopharmacological digestive tract. It results in permanent psychosis, intractable depression or brain damage, depending on which drug rep reaches your doctor first!

The protestors marched through downtown Philadelphia ending across the street from the conference center. A few curious conference attendees inquired about the protestor's message and demands, although most deliberately avoided eye-contact and walked by without engaging. I struck up a conversation with a group of two medical students and their mentor, who were finishing their psychiatric residencies in New York. They explained to me that their only encounters with the mentally ill were in hospital settings, during acute crises. They never had the opportunity to talk to patients in any other context and were largely unaware of mental health rights movements, outside of a vague caricature of anti-psychiatry. The residents believed that all activists critical of psychiatry held naïve views about mental illness, and denied the suffering and illness they witnessed daily. They shared a suspicion with the activists towards the profit motives of the Pharmaceutical industry, but were unaware of the range of beliefs and sophisticated critiques within the mad movement. An activist I later shared this exchange with remarked that it was easy to understand how these doctors' limited exposure to the lives of their patients outside of crisis restricts their ability to appreciate the long-term impact of their treatments. It was easy to imagine how this inhibited them from recognizing the toxic mixture of help and harm inflicted by their profession in the name of healing.

The protesters delivered more short speeches over bullhorns, and continued the chants and songs heard throughout the march:

>"What do we want? Human Rights! When do we want them? Now!"

>"Hey, Hey APA... How many shots did you force today?"

>"Hey, Hey APA... How many kids did you kill today?"

The label ripping ceremony was embraced enthusiastically. Dozens of activists lined up holding pieces of paper with diagnostic labels, and one by one proclaimed independence from the labels and reclaimed authorship of their own identities.

>"Fuck the labels!"

>"This is not me!"

>"I'm a patient, not a diagnosis. And, I have a voice!"

>"I am not a label!"

>"Label jars, not people!"

>"I live, I love, I'm passionate, I'm a songwriter, I'm a singer, and I'm not a label!"

The action was filmed by activists, journalists and documentary filmmakers, but due to the location of the protest, few conference attendees witnessed the live ceremony. The complete rally, march and protest were published on YouTube on the PsychRights channel, and the label ripping ceremony was covered by the Philadelphia Inquirer (Burling, 2012) and incorporated by the BBC Newshour in their coverage of the APA (Marshall, 2012).

After the label ripping ceremony, the protest slowly dispersed. The organizers considered the day's actions to be a phenomenal success. Organizers I spoke with remarked that the turnout was larger than anticipated, the media coverage more extensive, and the enthusiasm and participation was higher than an average APA protest.

#Imagining a different future#

A smaller number of activists remained in Philadelphia overnight, many of them planning to attend another event organized mental health activists entitled "Imagining a Different Future". This event was held on Sunday, May 6th and featured keynote addresses by Jim Gottstein, attorney and founder of the Law Project for Psychiatric Rights and Robert Whitaker, journalist and author of _Mad In America_ and _Anatomy of an Epidemic_. The keynotes were followed by a question and answer session facilitated by Joseph Rogers, executive director of National Mental Health Consumers' Self-Help Clearinghouse. Gottstein's keynote repeated some of the information he presented at Saturday's rally, but his message was broader and included a call for the creation of more alternatives that would enable the courts to direct patients to services outside the mainstream. Without these alternatives, consumers and the justice system have very little choices for dealing with crises. Whitaker, who was not present for the rally or the march, presented his moving and informative stump speech that summarized many of the findings in his books. An award winning investigative journalist, Whitaker's most recent book was titled _Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric Drugs, and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in America_ which was awarded the IRE prize for the best investigative reporting book of 2010. Whitaker documents the worsening of long-term outcomes for mentally ill patients treated with medication. Through meta-studies and rich anecdotal data, he documents an "iatrogenic epidemic", one caused by the treatment itself. He finds damning evidence of the long-term detrimental effects of the new generation of so-called "atypical" anti-psychotics, called atypical due to researchers initial belief about their reduced side-effects. Through a thorough review of meta-studies, Whitaker shows that patients who were taken off of this class of drugs have much better long-term prognosis than those who take them chronically. In particular, in poor countries with limited psychiatric services, the longitudinal outcomes for patients are significantly better than in countries where aggressive treatment of patients with antipsychotics is common. In countries like the US, where chronic treatment with antipsychotics is the norm, patients are more likely to experience relapse, brain damage, and reduced life-spans. They are also much less likely to reintegrate into society, as measured by employment and independence from social services. The _New Scientist_ review of _Anatomy of an Epidemic_ characterized Whitaker's argument as follows:

>Whitaker wants us to believe psychiatry itself is to blame, and that scientific incompetence and corrupting self-interest have prevented reliable assessments of mental disorders and treatments alike. The author's belief that we could have got it so wrong seems far-fetched. Up close, however, his arguments are worryingly sane and consistently based on evidence. They amount to a provocative yet reasonable thesis, one whose astonishing intellectual punch is delivered with the gripping vitality of a novel. (Burch, 2010)

A few members of the APA's "Radical Caucus" attended these talks, and afterward they extended an invitation to the protesters to join the Radical Caucus' yearly meeting the following day.

#Now in 3D!#

In addition to Sunday's event at the church, I also participated directly in the APA conference itself. One of the panels I attended was entitled "The Contributions of Brain Imaging to the Study of Psychosis", chaired by Raquel E. Gur, Professor of Psychiatry Neurology and Radiology at the University of Pennsylvania's school of medicine. The panel included talks exploring the use of brain imaging to differentiate schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (Keshavan, 2012), another presenting correlations between working memory and prodromal psychosis (Seidman, 2012), and Gur's talk on brain function in psychosis-prone youth (2012). Notably, all of the panelists' presentations included their research on predicting and identifying prodromal risk, even though this aspect was absent from the panel's title.

Seidman's talk included a primer on "traits", a construct that researchers postulated that was meant to capture a predisposition for a certain behavior. The researchers affirmed the existence of traits regardless of whether the behavior had ever been exhibited, a suspiciously counterfactual definition. Traits are the ideal vehicle for "prodromal" diagnoses – they feel custom-made to explain the tendency or propensity for a disease that only exists in potential, and has never been expressed. I learned that despite the APA's insistence that prodromal diagnosis had been relegated to the appendix of DSM-5, research within this paradigm has proceeded for over a decade and the trend is only growing.

In the exhibition hall, drug companies, medical equipment manufacturers and publishers hawked their wares and vied to leave memorable impressions. I have visited similar exhibition halls at technology conferences, and the extravagant opulence at this event made the tech expos look impoverished in comparison. Due to statutes banning gifts to physicians introduced in Minnesota and Massachusetts (Grande, 2010), the vendors were wary about the giveaways they could dispense, although it was left up to the attendees to self-identify as residents of the regulated states. At one lavish espresso bar, recipients of the espresso needed to sign a paper affirming that they did not practice in those states.

One prominent installation in the center of the hall continuously looped a three-dimensional educational film depicting a neurological reaction. Participants donned 3D glasses to watch the active pharmaceutical agent repair the broken brain chemistry, entirely devoid of the brain's host, or his or her context. Another vendor hawked psychiatric malpractice insurance. Dark humor abounded, as electroshock devices on display were hooked up to stuffed animals in a display of gross insensitivity.

One of the most notable experiences was the AstroZeneca installation. AstroZeneca, the makers of the anti-psychotic Seroquel (_quetiapine fumarate_), had a large pavilion. I signed up for a presentation that was delivered by a Key Opinion Leader, or KOL. KOL's are psychiatrists hired by the pharmaceutical companies to pitch their wares, a practice motivated by the assumption that doctors respond better to other doctors than to salespeople without medical degrees, a notion validated by studies (Elliot, 2010). KOLs are paid on average tens thousands of dollars per year (MarketWire, 2008; Dollars for Doctors, n.d.), and are often provided with precise scripts that they must read verbatim. During the presentation I attended, an AstroZeneca representative with a clipboard stood at the back of the small crowd scribbling extensive notes on a detailed checklist. The evaluator attentively monitored the performance, and the KOL regularly glanced his way, seeking approval. The presentation I attended started in one corner of the pavilion, and about half a dozen other doctors attended the presentation. The presenter talked for a few minutes over a slide show while we stood listening, asked us for questions, and then guided us to another corner of the pavilion where she resumed her presentation where she had left off. We made our way to all four corners of the pavilion, and I was left puzzled by the act of delivering the pitch from these four different locations. The explanation for this format could be as simple as flow control, allowing multiple groups through the pavilion in parallel, but the experience of standing and then relocating to a new station also reminded me of medical grand rounds. I wondered if this resemblance was deliberate, meant to lend credibility and authority to the presentation through a subtle subconscious association.

My experience walking the halls of the APA reminded me of the system's vast resources and the challenges that reform faces. The sheer capital and marketing muscle was fully evident, as was the entrenchment around the paradigm and language. While there was a streak of skepticism among a small percentage of participants, too many accepted the status quo, and the few who acknowledged the protesters joked about them and dismiss their claims.

#The Radical Caucus Ruckus#

One immediate outcome of the weekend's actions was that a group of psychiatrists self-identified as the Radical Caucus invited the protestors to their annual meeting. The meeting was held during the APA in a conference room at a Courtyard Marriott, one block from the convention center. The meeting of the Radical Caucus was not part of the official APA program, but the group had been meeting for years on this occasion. The meeting was followed by an informal dinner at an upscale Cuban restaurant, and the activists were also invited to attend.

The Radical Caucus meeting was the culmination of the weekend protests. It offers a distillation of this dissertation's central contention that un-credentialed stakeholders are systematically silenced, even by their purported allies within the establishment. The clash that followed encapsulates this dynamic, from agenda setting to solidarity around substantive issues, and demonstrates the deep rift in trust that decades of trauma and abuse have created. Although many of the psychiatrists in the room have published peer-reviewed papers advocating positions that are sympathetic to movement causes, actualizing those positions proved challenging in practice.

The meeting was recorded by a documentary crew working on a transmedia project called _Cause of Death: Unknown_ (Hoel, in press). Andrew Grant, the film's producer, graciously provided me with complete footage of the meeting, which I used as the basis for this analysis. Grant and Anniken Hoel are working on a film that tells the story of Anniken's sister, Renate Hoel, who died suddenly and unexpectedly while under psychiatric treatment for a condition diagnosed as schizophrenia. The autopsy declared her cause of death unknown, and Anniken's investigation of her sister's death has led her on a decade long investigation of the global pharmaceutical industry. Their crew gathered footage at the APA protests and conference throughout the weekend.

The initial call for the meeting was focused on discussing the relationship between economic disparity and mental illness:

>The Radical Caucus of Members of the APA invites everyone to a meeting to discuss how to make psychiatry and the APA more relevant to the people of this country... Although biomedical research is important, there is ample evidence that economic conditions account for much more of the "explained variance" in mental illness than any single genetic factor. This nation can do considerably more for public mental health if there are serious efforts to redistribute wealth through tax restructuring, providing foreclosure relief, creating jobs programs, and enhancing public investment. Let's discuss what we can do. Please join us. Everyone is welcome.

Dr. Carl Cohen, a psychiatrist with a New York practice, distributed this invitation over email in the days before the conference, and facilitated the gathering. Cohen is a middle-aged New Yorker with a Brooklyn accent and a soft laugh. Cohen is intelligent and caring, with a warm demeanor in one-on-one encounters, but he was unable to command a strong presence once the meeting became contentious. His weak facilitation skills contributed to the confusion that unfolded.

According to Cohen, the Radical Caucus started in 1968, and was "organized in Miami around the anti-war protest in the late 60s". When the anti-war movement died out, so did the radical caucus. It was reformed in 1979 in San Francisco where they "brought together a lot of people in the Bay Area to talk about radical perspectives on psychiatry." For years, the Radical Caucus meetings were essentially dinners that a small number of like-minded psychiatrists attended. They did not publish statements or press releases, and were largely a footnote to the APA proceedings. Cohen continued to describe the groups activity: "Periodically, we've done some various critiques of the biomedical approach in psychiatry, we've dealt with torture victims and immigrant populations, joblessness and various economic issues, consumer rights, global psychiatry, and I think most of the topics related to biological reductionism, consumer issues, psychiatric abuse, socio-economical and cultural issues. I think that about sums it up. We've been probably more intellectual than active, although many of us have been active on our own."

Cohen spent about five minutes framing the meeting, explaining the agenda of the meeting was intended to "[deal] with the fact that psychiatry has typically been ignoring many of the severe economic problems in this country... [since] we know that income disparities create problems in health and mental health, and as well as mortality." Cohen hoped the group would "come up with some statements about it and then some action plans, either to present to the APA and beyond." Cohen introduced Dr. Duncan White, a psychiatrist practicing in Maine "who has been very interested in topics of economic disparity and economic inequality."

#A Pot Luck Parable#

White began talking, adopting the posture and tone of a university lecturer. His starting point was very abstract, as he laid out a thought experiment depicting the extreme wealth inequality in the global economy. White continued to explain the severity of wealth disparity and extreme poverty, without explicitly connecting these issues to mental health or psychiatry. He asked the room to imagine one hundred people sitting around a table having dinner representing the entire population of the world. "so 100 plates of dinner of the foods of the world is brought in and 56 of those dinners are placed beside this one man. One is placed in front of him, the next 39 get one dinner each, and the remaining 60 get a saucer about 4-inches in diameter with one spoonful of rice." White explained two effects caused by this inequality. The physical effects of malnourishment leading to disease and death, and the emotional effects of shame and humiliation, elicited when people "are looked down upon, seen as not worthy of being spoken to, that their plight is their fault, that they are irresponsible lazy, all the things that describe poor people often."

When I spoke to group participants after the meeting I confirmed that most were expecting a more interactive format, and I watched as many of the activists become visibly restless as the lecture continued. After about 10 minutes into White's lecture, David Oaks, who was noticeably frustrated by the format and substance of the meeting, interjected:

>Duncan - can I put an asterisk in here? Because, obviously this end of the table is pretty distressed. They're on Prozac, Zoloft, Paxil, neuroleptics... very, very heavily drugged by the psych industry.... Suppose I was a 1-percenter here, and I announced that... I'm gonna hold a radical caucus that doesn't invite in the people from the most disempowered part. This meeting should be majority mental health consumer and psych survivor. The most radical thing... you guys could do as a radical caucus is to invite those people down from the other end of the table into the 1%-er and be allies, and work together and unite.

White appeared slightly flustered by the interruption of his thought experiment and tried to reassure Oaks that he was planning to get to the psychiatric interventions later. Oaks responded, "I think we just did." and started to explain that Cohen had appointed him the meeting leader when he walked in. Something about the exchange trigged Oaks to stand up and sing:

>_Die Gedanken Sind Frei---my thoughts freely flower,_\newline
_Die Gedanken Sind Frei---my thoughts give me power,_\newline
_No scholar can map them, no hunter can trap them,_\newline
_No one can deny, [yells and pounds]_\newline
_Die Gedanken [pound pound] Sind Frei._\newline
_I think as I please, and this gives me pleasure,_\newline
_my conscience decrees, this right I must treasure._\newline
_My thoughts will not cater to duke or dictator,_\newline
_no one can deny, Die Gedanken Sind Frei..._\newline
_And if tyrants take me---yes, you down there at the end of the table---_\newline
_if tyrants take our people and throw them in prison,_\newline
_our thoughts will burst free, like blossoms in season,_\newline
_foundations will crumble and structures will tumble,_\newline
_and free folk will cry: Die Gedanken Sind Frei!_\newline
_And that means, our thoughts are free. They can't be controlled._

Several people at the meeting appeared disturbed by Oaks' electric performance. I overheard a psychiatrist sitting next to me crack a snarky joke to his neighbor that Oaks must have forgotten to take his Lithium that morning. Oaks continued:

>You can't stop what I'm doing right here. Oppressed people are gonna be rising up... Please, if you are our allies, invite us in. You guys are professionals in emotions, deal with the anger of traumatized people... invite in the mental health consumers, invite in the psychiatric survivors... read about how a bunch of psych survivors were in front of the APA protesting. We had a few allies, but not enough... [puts on red clown nose] I am here for Patch Adams... he screens people for normality, and we are screening you for normality right now... Every single one of us is unique, different, unusual.... we are begging you guys to be our allies in the one-percent, cause you're one-percenters, like it or not. We are asking you to be a part of a non-violent revolution. No more reform at the APA... We've tried dialog. Help us with civil disobedience. With protest, with activism. Be our real allies.

Oaks' performance was seen by as counterproductive by some, and heroic by others. The intensity of the protesters' emotions was visible over the weekend, and the incongruity with the energy of the radical caucus was palpable. It is difficult to judge if Oaks' outburst was calculated or unrestrained. He was genuinely frustrated by the lack of urgency he perceived within the Radical Caucus, and especially by their tone deafness to the needs of the constituency he was representing. He also seemed to be driven by a need to perform as a leader in front of the activists present in the room. Ultimately, the mismatch in the tenor of the protests and the staid decorum of the Radical Caucus proved difficult to reconcile. The meeting will undoubtedly be remembered by all of the attendees, and it is unclear how a gentler intervention would have changed the course of the conversation.

I spoke to Oaks later that night and he insisted his spectacle was spontaneous and was not premeditated. For years, Oaks has performed a routine at protests that involves dressing up in a white lab coat, donning a red clown nose and "scanning" people for normal using a rubber chicken. It is plausible that he happened to have his red nose with him during the meeting, from an action earlier that day. "Die Gedanken Sind Frei" is a traditional protest song, whose lyrics first appeared in pamphlets in the beginning of the 19th century. The song was taken up by anti-Nazi resistance movements, and in the 20th century has been associated with groups opposing fascism (Melon, 2007). Oaks has sung this song in speeches before, and his selection of this song represents his defiance of the "thought policing" that characterizes the worst of psychiatry, and an accusation that equates psychiatric oppression with historical fascism. He implores the doctors in the room, who are "professionals in emotion" to "deal with the anger of traumatized people". This plea, while not quite apologetic, surfaced the traumatic scars and raw emotions that must be processed and patiently tolerated for meaningful dialogue to proceed.

White accepted the outburst in stride, responding "I think, I appreciate your, I respect your passion with which you spoke, and I think there is actually quite a bit of common ground... I'll speak for myself, that I've been trying to think for myself outside of the bounds of, conventional bounds of psychiatry, which is quite difficult. I think you brought in a justified sense of passion which is absolutely needed." White then returned to the thought experiment he was explaining before the interruption. He invoked Marx and Gramsci, and touched on psychiatry's role in defining social reality.

After another five full minutes of exposition, Oaks interrupted him again, asking---when will the workshop part of the meeting begin? White ignored the interruption and expounded on the idea that therapists reinforce the existing order, and they often "[discount] the social nature of your injury" and "turn the inequalities of the existing order into a series of personal problems." He emphasized that changing individual practice is important, but doesn't change the system.

As White wrapped up his thought experiment, Oaks again jumped in, imploring him to go around the room and ask people to introduce themselves. White replied that he would let Cohen decide what to do next and completed his lecture, a full 30 minutes into the meeting. Cohen took a moment to plug the _Liberatory Psychiatry_ (2008) anthology he co-edited, and then tried to move the conversation to a discussion. Cohen agreed not to talk anymore and he asked Oaks not to talk for a while, at which point Oaks once again requested that people introduce themselves. "It's like one of the most radical things you can do. Not to break domination, by having one, one individual run the meeting. Just go around and quickly say your names and introduce yourselves and say hi." Cohen was concerned that introductions would take too much time, but finally relented and the participants introduced themselves.

#Seats at the Proverbial Table#

The participant's questions brought up issues relating to universal health care, corruption and greed in the insurance and pharmaceutical industries, and economic issues resulting in unemployment and the housing crisis. These issues all had an impact on society's mental health, and some of the meeting attendees wanted to call on the APA to take a public position on these policy issues. Like the mental health professionals in Zuccotti Park, they were prepared to critique the external forces of capitalism and policy, but had a very difficult time holding the mirror up to themselves, and critiquing their own profession and practices. The activists in the room thought the caucus was externalizing the problems and evading issues that psychiatry was directly responsible for.

A few participants tried to bring the focus of the conversation back to psychiatry's responsibilities. Frank Blakenship, a long-time Mindfreedom member, raised concerns about the "emphasis on the insurance company... given the amount of iatrogenic disease there is in the psychiatric field". He questioned the emphasis on insurance coverage instead of the damage that psychiatric drugs caused (he was also concerned that insurance companies would not cover the treatment for damage these drugs caused). Dr. Brad Lewis raised the issue of medicine becoming increasingly unaffordable, which in turn has pushed "more people off the insurance roles". He described how doctors have been complicit in designing practices and treatments that are unaffordable and unsustainable, and practitioners shared some of the responsibility for reduced access to services.

Andrew Grant, the documentary producer filming the meeting, prodded the audience: "How do you all feel about the proposed changes to the DSM, that are only going to classify more people in our society as mentally ill?" His question was applauded.

A young psychiatrist named Margaret Balfour responded:

I just finished my training a year ago...I started off as a researcher.... I used to think the DSM was very important and when people didn't stick to the criteria it annoyed me.... As I gained more experience, I found them to be less important... To label everybody and diagnose it [is] not useful....I don't think we've learned enough to have a whole new book, and it's probably not gonna be that useful in actual clinical practice. But it's gonna generate a whole lot of discussion and controversy and money.

#Involuntary votes#

A member of the radical caucus tried to recognize and diffuse some of the tension in the room. He acknowledged the pain and trauma of some of the participants, and apologized to them on behalf of his profession. He then became quite defensive, and insisted that his practice was collaborative and not oppressive.

One of the psychiatrists described the tension in the meeting as disorganizing, and unhelpful. An activist responded that it has to be disorganizing, and that "there's going to be tension because people are dying". Another activist corroborated this sentiment, explaining that he was enraged since "we have people who have forced electroshock at the age of six, solitary confinement, tardive dyskinesia, still from the atypicals [anti-psychotics]."

Oaks jumped in and compared the APA to the Catholic Church, likening the cover-ups of psychiatric abuse to the Church's cover-ups of child abuse. He expressed that he expected the radical caucus to "be able to handle the anger", and was also "tired of hearing allies who say behind my closed doors 'I'm so great with patients... things are getting better, and everything'. Where the hell is your letter to the editor about forced electroshock?" This stream of consciousness led to the meeting's next twist, with Oaks calling for an impromptu vote on the opposition to involuntary electroshock:

>If this place is truly a radical caucus, right now I ought to be able to say... that we are opposed to involuntary electroshock over the expressed wishes of the subject... Are people opposed to involuntary electroshock over the expressed wishes of the subject? ... The same position as the world health organization...

Dr. David Pollack began losing his temper, and started yelling over Oaks in a cross tone, "David, David, David you be quiet for a minute please!" Oaks accused Pollack of interrupting the vote because he was afraid to see it's outcome, but Pollack insisted he was just trying to follow the meeting protocols. Oaks accused Pollack of calling his behavior "inappropriate", a loaded clinical term that is often used when diagnosing psychotic behavior. Pollack denied calling Oaks "inappropriate", but characterized his behavior as "rude". Oaks volunteered to stop speaking after pointing out that "his silencing" began when he asked for a vote on "forced electroshock over the expressed interest of the subject". Pollack replies to Oaks that he "appreciate[s his] position" but he "resent[s his] style". Pollack went on to assert that "the psychiatrists who are here are the kinds of radical community based psychiatrists, who basically are in line with everything that you all have been saying." He claimed he would have voted against forced electroshock, but he resented the process Oaks employed to initiate the vote. He defended approaching the issues from the vantage point of social and economic abstractions covered at the beginning of the meeting, since "these health systems that are extremely flawed to try to raise consciousness, improve things not in a piecemeal or patchwork way, but to it in a way that will hopefully lead to better results." Finally, Pollack turns the tables on Oaks and asks him to respect the pain that psychiatrists struggle with: "We are limited in terms of our power, to do things in all the ways that we think we would like to. So, we have to struggle with that. We struggle with that pain that we feel, and we think that you should respect in some ways that pain as well as we respecting the pain and the trauma that you've felt."

The meeting had devolved into bickering, and at stake were its substance, format, and especially agenda setting. The organizers of the Radical Caucus had made the mistake of starting out the meeting by "talking at" the activists they invited. The professionals had a difficult time listening to the activists' concerns and adjusting their program to address them. Instead, they largely replicated the doctor-patient power dynamic, setting the agenda, lecturing to the room, and relegating questions to a supplementary but secondary question and answer period. Their defensiveness was particularly off-putting to the activists. While the activists weren't accusing anyone present at the meeting of malfeasance or malpractice, they would have been more reassured by support and solidarity from within the establishment. Dr. Brad Lewis, cultural theorist and psychiatrist questioned the defensiveness of the psychiatrists present and called on them to work directly on developing alternative treatment models:

>Why are the psychiatrists so nervous and defensive?... I try to do the best I can with my patients, but I'm not defensive that people are really mad about where psychiatry is going... Why does that make the radical people nervous?... I think that somehow they feel they're being blamed...We need alternatives to hospitalizations... we need mutual aid programs [and] opportunities, we need alternatives to the drugging... And once that begins to happen then you begin to start seeing the court start sending people there, and you also begin to see that changing people's mind.

One activists I spoke with referred to the psychiatrist who was proud of his practice and made the comment "I don't happen to be at that point when people wind up in that state. You all think that there's no such thing, but I don't want to go there". Here, the psychiatrist meant that he does not typically treat patients undergoing acute emotional crisis in his practice, thereby avoiding situations that might warrant coercive treatment. Some psychiatrists avoid taking patients with more extreme case histories, and primarily treat patients with milder disorders. The activist found his aside---"You all think there's no such thing"---to be particularly infuriating, since it was based on a flawed assumption that lumped together all opposition to psychiatry as orthodox anti-psychiatry, denying the existence of acute crises warranting psychiatric support or intervention. The way this assertion was formulated felt like it shut down all debate, and was understood as a swipe at the legitimacy of the activists in the room.

As the meeting drew to a close, Cohen summarized the proceedings, and enumerated the issues the group had raised: 1) "The pharmaceutical industries, it's connections with the economy, and the influence of that industry on psychiatry"; 2) "The insurance companies'... denial of care", and the privatization of Medicaid and Medicare; 3) Concerns over the "national database for psychiatric patients"; 4) Advocating for a single payer system and universal health care; 5) Campaign finance reform; 6) Creating "change on an individual level"; 7) Working to create more treatment alternatives; 8) The "problem" of the DSM manual---"Should we be advocating just the abolition of classification systems altogether?"; 9) "The strained systems that we have and the reduced time for patients"; and, 10) Creating coalitions and alliances with activists and the UK's Critical Psychiatry.

David Oaks responded once more, indignant that the question of forced electroshock was omitted:

>I could have sworn that involuntary electroshock over the express issues of the subject came up... You need a different committee. You need an activist human rights committee... You're silencing me... Everybody is complicit when there's silence. Not just the abusers, the silencers are complicit... A laundry list isn't real activism. If you want a real action plan, take one thing to do. I think its time to start a new caucus.

The Radical Caucus is comprised of well-intentioned psychiatrists, trying in earnest to affect change in their profession and taking a stand against inequality. The deep miscalculation exposed at this meeting was the ways that both camps developed their priorities in isolation, and did not consult with the stakeholders at the other end of the prescription pad. If the Radical Caucus had attended the morning rally, or the label ripping ceremony, or opened the meeting with introductions and an open question around the most important issues one people's minds, the meeting would most likely have unfolded differently. Similarly, many of the activists were unaware of the existence of the Radical Caucus before that weekend, and had done little to research or understand their history or priorities. The issues raised by the Radical Caucus were all important, and largely aligned with the activists' values, but not their priorities.

The tensions that surfaced at this meeting were disconcerting, but unsurprising. Although the radical caucus had invited the protestors to their meeting, they were not invited as first-class participants, nor were the psychiatrists fully prepared to listen to their criticisms and acknowledge their pain without becoming defensive. The protesters also should have also arrived better prepared, with a better understanding of the Radical Caucus' membership and their planned agenda. The clash of expectations around the presentation format exacerbated the tensions, and helped lead to increased hostility and the breakdown in communication. Coming into the meeting, trust between participants was fragile, at best. This tension should have been acknowledged, and attempts to diffuse it instead of deny it could have led to a more productive exchange.

Analogous to psychiatry's tendency to command their patients' personal narratives and choose labels for them, the Radical Caucus asserted the agenda of resistance without consulting with the people subject to the brunt of forms of treatment they regard as oppression. They swooped in to address extreme poverty, and tried to make a compelling case for the relationship between poverty and mental illness, but neglected the immediate and pressing concerns of the protestors who had traveled from around the country to express their frustrations at the APA. The protesters also squandered an opportunity to cultivate allies, and allowed their mistrust and hostility towards the entire profession cloud their judgment. The meeting participants had far more in common with each other than the fireworks suggest, and all parties can learn a great deal from The Icarus Project's meeting agreements that we will encounter in the next chapter. In particular, everyone at this meeting should have listened more, paid more attention to repeating patterns and "listened like allies." The meeting would have greatly benefited from stipulating meeting agreements at the start, to help set more uniform expectations within the group over communicative protocols.

#Conclusion#

The 2012 American Psychiatric Association conference was a pivotal moment in the evolution of the mad movement. With the release of the DSM-5, the NIMH's shift away from the DSM and a growing surge of criticism of mainstream psychiatry, a new generation of activists took steps toward finding a new voice and a new message. This message is still being formulated and refined, but at its core it is a recapitulation of the refrain, "Nothing about us without us".

Although this argument was implied it was never explicitly spoken. "Nothing about us without us" is a formulation that is evocative and clear, but mad activists have yet to fully embrace this slogan as their own. Throughout my fieldwork, I uncovered no opposition to this slogan, or to greater solidarity with the larger disability rights movement. Rather, I think the mad activists are still evolving the ways they theorize and conceptualize their positions. Instead of claiming the oppositional stance of anti-psychiatry, the new wave of mad activists demand participatory authorship over their identities and personal narratives. To me, this move closely echoes the demands of the disability rights movement, and the new wing of the mad movement is on the verge of arriving at this understanding and explicitly embracing these politics.

Elements of the mad movement are also starting to demand seats at various tables of power, including the tables of academia, the tables of public policy, and the tables where diagnosis is defined and treatment is determined. The meeting of the Radical Caucus shows how much work lies ahead in healing these divides. Many of the doctors at the meeting believed themselves to be good people, trying their best to help their patients. They differentiated themselves from the "bad" psychiatrists, who they vilified as greedy and corrupt. As a group, they externalized the problems in the system by blaming the forces of government regulation, insurance and pharmaceutical corporations and structural inequality. They had difficulty recognizing their own power within the APA, and understanding how their daily practice might help improve conditions through the creation of alternatives to mainstream treatment. The activists struggled to be heard, throwing a veritable tantrum when they did not get the attention they wanted, and practically inviting themselves to be ignored as a result. Their demand to be involved in agenda setting, and to participate in setting priorities is reasonable. However, their tactics may have been counter-productive and to be taken more seriously as equal stakeholders, they too must learn to listen more closely to the fears and desires of their potential allies.

Agenda setting and consensus building need to be shared across much wider constituencies to fully realize a more ethical coalition. Future meetings of the Radical Caucus ought to expand this coalition even wider, inviting senior citizens, veterans, prisoners and children's rights activists to represent their voices and concerns. All of these groups are facing an onslaught of psychiatric attention and it is crucial for them to figure out how to effectively communicate and work together to respond to this offensive.