\chapter{Counterfactual Cures: Manufacturing disease and dissent}\label{chapter-two}

\cleanchapterquote{Drugs! What'd they give you? Thorazine? Haldol? How much? Learn your drugs --- know your doses. It's elementary...}{Jeffery Goines}{12 Monkeys} 

The transformation in resistance to the psychiatric-pharmaceutical establishment I describe in this dissertation is best understood against the backdrop of the expansive growth in psychiatric diagnosis and treatment witnessed globally over the past two decades (Angell, 2004a; Barber, 2008; Frances, 2014a). The statistics describing this growth tell a powerful and convincing story. To gain a more visceral appreciation of this period of growth it is also useful to closely examine a specific site of psychiatric-pharmaceutical expansion, the diagnosis and treatment of children. The tactics employed by the pharmaceutical industry around the marketing of these new diseases and treatments have become typical, and are employed with other populations---e.g., prisoners, veterans, and seniors---and, around other conditions, such as anxiety, shyness and attention. It is valuable to consider this example in detail to fully appreciate the machinations of this industrial golem.

In this chapter I describe the reinvention of the _pediatric bipolar_ diagnosis, and consider the implications of _prodromal diagnosis_, also known as _psychotic risk syndrome_. A prodrome is a symptom, or group of symptoms, that appears shortly before an acute attack of illness, and a prodromal diagnosis is intended to identify and prevent its full onset.These developments provoke a series of questions whose reach extends beyond the expertise of mental health researchers. Has the behavior of American youth grown more irritable and defiant, or has the adult judgment of their behavior changed? How can we explain the variations in diagnoses around the globe, and across racial and class lines If there is a dramatic shift in youth behavior, what factors and dynamics might be precipitating these changes? How much risk should people tolerate to avoid potential outcomes? What is the relationship between contemporary media representations and madness? Are alternative explanations for purported shifts in the behavior of children and adolescents being adequately explored?How can we effectively study and explain these dramatic transformations in judgment and behavior? Whose voices and perspectives should be taken into account in deciding these questions?

The research agenda I have outlined demands that we draw upon multidisciplinary approaches using a diversity of methods to effectively explore with these subjects. A comprehensive investigation of this agenda is beyond the scope of this chapter, or even a single dissertation. The abbreviated snapshot I present here is intended to illustrate how complex these issues are, and the ways they intersect across a range of methods and disciplines. The methodological approaches I outlined in the last chapter are suitable candidates for studying these issues, and a mixture of methods including scientific literature reviews, content analysis of media, supplemented by ethnographic studies of the relevant stakeholders are all invaluable ways of knowing that can provide a more holistic and complete grasp of these concerns.

This chapter paints picture of the milieu that surrounds the ethnographic studies I conduct in the upcoming chapters three, four and five. These controversies set the stage for the lives of the activists and mental health professionals I interacted with. Stories like the ones I profile in this chapter are regularly passed around in mental health networks, among activists and professionals alike. In later chapters we will explore alterative explanations and narrations of these conditions neglected by most psychiatric researchers. To more fully appreciate these stakeholder's perspectives, it is essential to share this context.

#Bad pharma#

Doctors, academics and journalists have written extensive accounts of disturbing trends in pharmaceutical expansion, and here I will only try to summarize this history in broad strokes. In 2004, Marcia Angell, an American physician, Harvard lecturer, and the first female Editor-in-Chief of the _New England Journal of Medicine_, published a book titled _The Truth about the Drug Companies: How They Deceive Us and What to Do about It_ (2004)_._ She described watching the drug companies stray from their original mission to discover healing drugs and become "vast marketing machines" with "nearly limitless influence over medical research, education, and how doctors do their jobs". David Healy is an Irish psychiatrist and researcher who studies the relationship between antidepressants and suicide, as well as conflicts of interest between pharmaceutical companies and academic researchers. _Pharmegeddon,_ his most recent book, forcefully argues that drug companies' drive for profits has led them to overhype the benefits of their products and downplay their risks, often with deadly consequences (2012). Most provocatively, Peter Gøtzsche, a Danish physician and researcher, and former sales representative for AstraZeneca, convincingly compares the pharmaceutical industry to organized crime syndicates in his book, _Deadly Medicines and Organized Crime: How Big Pharma Has Corrupted Healthcare_ (2013)_._ Drawing on published studies and numerous anecdotes, he describes an "extraordinary system failure caused by widespread crime, corruption, bribery and impotent drug regulation". These books are just a sampling from the long list of works detailing Pharma's bad faith (Kassirer, 2005; Goldacre, 2012). Taken together they demonstrate the urgency for industry regulation to correct this behavior, and a complete reexamination of how psychiatric knowledge is assembled and evaluated; the lack of any meaningful policy reform helps explain the rise in organized resistance.

In 2002, Americans spent $200 billion on prescription drugs, and this number has been growing at about twelve percent a year (Angell, 2004). The World Health Organization valued the global pharmaceutical market at $300 billion in 2015, and expects this to rise to $400 billion by 2018 (WHO, n. d.). The market is highly concentrated and the top ten pharmaceutical companies control over one-third of the market, with more than $10 billion per year in sales and thirty percent profit margins (WHO, 2015). In 2010, psychiatric medications were the second-best-selling class of drugs that year, their sales amounting to a combined total of 50 billion dollars (Healy, 2012).

In the five years between 1996 and 2001, the number of prescriptions for psychiatric drugs increased twenty percent per year, resulting in an increase of 5.5 million Americans, and the numbers continue to climb (Zuvekas, 2005). In 2011 Medco Health Solutions published _America's State of Mind_ (2011)showing that the number of insured Americans taking medications to treat psychological behavioral disorders had risen to more than 1-in-5 by 2010, an increase of 22% since 2001. The report also showed that more women took drugs for mental health conditions than men, prescriptions to children and the elderly continued to rise, and the use of atypical anti-psychotics soared to 3-4 times its previous rates. In 2009, a study showed that poor children with Medicaid coverage were four times more likely to be prescribed anti-psychotics than a child with private insurance (Crystal, Olfson, Huang, Pincus & Gerhard, 2009).

According to the Roper Center's opinion polls about public attitudes towards mental health, the general population continues to perceive a stigma around mental illness (77% in 1978 compared to 82% in 2002, although in 2004, 55% claimed that the stigma around depression had been significantly lifted), and psychiatrists' reputation for honesty and integrity is significantly lower than other medical doctors, nurses, pharmacists and dentists (Roper Center, 2015). Many believe that, as a society, we are increasingly overmedicated, but the complexity of the political economy driving this expansion and the sophisticated ways this growth is instrumented are easily underestimated (Whitaker, 2010; Gøtzsche, 2013; Frances, 2014a).

This remarkable growth can be traced to the increasing market pressure to create "blockbuster" drugs, defined as drugs whose yearly sales exceed one billion dollars. Blockbuster drugs commonly treat conditions such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure, asthma, diabetes and cancer, and some of the biggest blockbuster drugs are psychotropic (Greenberg, 2008; Herzberg, 2008). Anti-depressants were the first psychotropic drugs to join the billion dollar blockbuster club, with the tricyclic Miltown (_meprobamate_) leading the charge in the 1950s, followed by Valium (_diazepam_) in the 1970s, and Prozac (_fluoxetine_) and Paxil (_paroxetine_) in the 1980s (Herzberg, 2008). The "off-label" use of these drugs contributed significantly to their spectacular success. The term "off-label" is applied to prescriptions made outside the range of FDA approved uses of a drug. Doctors are permitted by law to prescribe any medication they believe is medically appropriate, to anyone, for any condition; however, the FDA must approve a drug for a particular condition and population before the pharmaceutical companies are allowed to market that drug for that usage.

Blockbuster profits spur aggressive tactics for drug companies to expand their bottom line and they exploit the regulatory environment to continue this growth. Drug company charters do not contain anything like the Hippocratic Oath's adage to "do no harm", and their only obligation is to maximize shareholder value within the parameters of the law. They advertise to doctors and directly to consumers, pursue aggressive legal strategies to protect and extend their intellectual property, and manage sophisticated marketing campaigns that include funding research, journals, conferences and sponsorships (Huskamp, 2006; Peterson, 2008; Lane, 2008).

The role of advertising and mass marketing in the creation of blockbuster diseases and drugs has been widely investigated and researched, but is still under-appreciated. Melody Peterson, a New York Times reporter who spent over four years on the pharmaceutical beat, published a book in 2008 _Our Daily Meds: How the Pharmaceutical Companies Transformed Themselves Into Slick Marketing Machines and Hooked the Nation on Prescription Drugs_ in which she details a 17-fold increase in spending on prescription drugs (for all categories) between 1980 and 2003(Peterson, 2008). In his book _Shyness:_ _How_ _ Normal_ _Behavior_ _Became_ _a_ _ Sickness_ Christopher Lane documents the sharp rise in disease and drug marketing, with many pharmaceutical product's marketing budgets dwarfing the marketing budgets of Hollywood blockbusters (Lane, 2008). The United States is the only country other than New Zealand where it is legal for pharmaceutical companies to advertise their branded products directly to consumers. Canada allows ads that mention the product or the indication, but not both, and the European Parliament has repeatedly rejected attempts to allow direct to consumer pharmaceutical advertising, even in the form of "information to patients" (Ventola, 2011). In New Zealand, the government is under intense pressure from consumers and professionals to ban the practice. (Minsitry of Health, 2006).

Direct to consumer advertising became legal in the US in 1985, and really took off in 1997 when the FDA relaxed the requirement to list all side-effects. A content analysis of television commercials in 2007 found that few ads (26%) described causes, risk factors or prevalence, some (18%) portrayed lifestyle changes as insufficient for change, and almost all (95%) included emotional appeals (Frosch, Krueger, Hornik, Cronholm, & Barg, 2007). The title of their paper captures the authors' argument: _Creating Demand for Prescription Drugs: A Content Analysis of Television Direct-to-Consumer Advertising_.

When it comes to mental and lifestyle illnesses, pharmaceutical companies seem to be in the business of manufacturing illnesses for which they also conveniently sell the cure. For example, the 2007 documentary _Does _ _Your_ _ Soul_ _Have_ _ a_ _Cold?_ tells the story of the aggressive, wholesale export of Western definitions of depression to Japan, a culture with alternative understandings and interpretations of social norms (Mills, 2007). Mike Mills, the film's director, traveled frequently to Japan and remembers feeling surprised when his friend shamelessly took an anti-depressant in front of him (Big Screen Little Screen, 2007). Mills' film explores the effects of globalization on Japanese culture, which traditionally encouraged the acceptance of suffering and sadness, and frowned upon the pursuit of happiness.

Mills began researching the popularization of mild depression in Japan, spurred by a New York Times article titled "Did Antidepressants Depress Japan?" (Schulz, 2004). What he learned inspired him to create a film documenting the lives of five people living with "_kokoro no kaze_" (soul colds). "_Kokoro_ _no_ _kaze_" is a marketing slogan invented by GlaxoSmithKline to avoid the stigma of the word "_utsubyo_", the clinical term for severe depression. According to Doug Berger, medical director of the Tokyo Meguro Counseling Center and a consultant to the Japanese pharmaceutical industry, Japan's "lucrative market" was "significantly lagging" behind western countries in their introduction of psychiatric medications (Berger, 2005). Tooru Takahashi, a psychiatrist who worked for Japan's National Institute of Mental Health for 30 years, explained, "Melancholia, sensitivity, fragility --- these are not negative things in a Japanese context. It never occurred to us that we should try to remove them, because it never occurred to us that they were bad.'' (Schulz, 2004). In her article, Kathryn Schultz interviewed Koji Nakagawa, a product manager for GlaxoSmithKline's blockbuster antidepressant Paxil. Nakagawa explained that direct-to-consumer advertising was illegal in Japan, but the company exploited a loophole and relied on educational campaigns targeting mild depression. He elaborated, "People didn't know they were suffering from a disease. We felt it was important to reach out to them." GlaxoSmithKline formulated a simple message: "Depression is a disease that anyone can get. It can be cured by medicine. Early detection is important.'" (Schulz, 2004).

The introduction of western norms around depression and sadness is not unique to Japan. Laurence Kirmayer, director of the Social and Transcultural Psychiatry division at McGill's Trauma and Global Health program, published a paper in the _Journal of Clinical Psychiatry_ on cultural variations in depression and anxiety. He concludes:

>In most parts of the world, people with symptoms related to depression and anxiety do not view their problems as psychiatric... Assuming that psychiatry does have something to offer such patients (this is not certain, but is at least worth testing), the clinician's task involves acquiring sufficient understanding of the patient's point of view and preferences... not only of a patient's ethnocultural backgrounds, but the structure of the health care system they find themselves in and the diagnostic categories and concepts they encounter in mass media and in dialogue with family, friends, and clinicians (2001).

In the U.S., direct-to-consumer and direct-to-doctor advertising and marketing campaigns continue because they are unregulated, and they work. Direct-to-consumer pharmaceutical advertising is the most prominent type of health communication that the American public encounters (Ventola, 2011). The pharmaceutical companies continue to innovate around peddling influence and persuasion with incredibly subtle and sophisticated marketing efforts. There is an urgent need for more research, regulation and literacy campaigns around the persuasive tactics employed in the marketing of disorders and blockbuster drugs worldwide.

Pharma's marketing campaigns extend beyond traditional blunt advertising, and are also designed to cultivate indirect influence. Pharma-funded speaking fees, research bounties and sponsored presentations generate influence and spawn serious conflicts of interest. ProPublica, "an independent, non-profit newsroom that produces investigative journalism in the public interest" produces an ongoing transparency project called "Dollars for Docs" that tracks the flow of industry dollars to doctors and other health professionals (Dollars for Docs, n.d.). Launched in 2010, Dollars for Docs now tracks over 4 billion dollars in payments to physicians from over 17 companies. Psychiatrists dominate this database, and they receive more money from drug companies than any other specialty (Wood & Lowes, 2010; Jones & Ornstein, 2015).

To fully appreciate the financial motives behind the expansion into these new markets it is also essential to understand the role of intellectual property law in this information ecology. Pharmaceutical companies are granted patents on their discoveries, guaranteeing them a limited monopoly that is supposed to incentivize innovation. Putting aside the ethics of controlling potentially life-saving drugs, all of these patents eventually expire, falling off the so-called "patent cliff", leaving drug companies with a gaping shortfall in profits (Hari, 2009). Expanding the diagnostic criteria for treatments extends the patent clock, and gives drug companies more time to reap bumper profits from their drugs. For example, pediatric bipolar diagnoses were popularized just as some ADHD drugs were coming off patent, meaning generic versions would cut significantly into drug companies' blockbuster sales (DeRuiter & Holston, 2012). The popularization of this diagnosis helped make up for this shortfall by ushering in a surge of sales for atypical anti-psychotics. Anti-psychotics were still under patent, but in the late 1990s were prescribed primarily to the smaller population of schizophrenics. As anti-psychotics were approved to treat new disorders, like depression and bipolar, their patent clocks were reset, staving off the introduction of generic equivalents.

The mid-1990s also marked the beginning of a pattern where drug companies illegally promoted their products off-label using a variety of techniques to suggest that a drug could be used to treat conditions that had not received FDA approval (Peterson, 2008). The statistics of off-label use are not readily available, but a 2006 study estimated that over 20 percent of all overall prescriptions are made off-label, while the percentage of off-label use for specific drugs, including anti-depressants, anti-convulsants and anti-psychotics can range as high as 50 percent (Radley, Finkelstein & Stafford). The authors report that very little is known about the frequency of off-label prescriptions, and their methods relied upon analyzing a statistically representative sample of physician reported diagnoses alongside their prescriptions. If some doctors reported diagnoses to match their prescription, these numbers may under-represent the occurrence off-label prescriptions. Obtaining FDA approval is an expensive and lengthy process, involving multiple rounds of human trials. Off-label prescriptions are common, and often some research has been conducted on the safety and effectiveness of a drug when used off-label.

In 1996 David Franklin blew the whistle on Pfizer's off-label promotion of Neurotin (_gabapentin_), a drug approved to help control epileptic seizures that was being prescribed for bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, insomnia, restless legs syndrome, hot flashes and migraines with sales of $2.7 billion in 2003 (Angell, 2009). Pfizer paid academics to endorse off-label uses by attaching their names to journal articles where these uses were described, and by funding conferences where these off-label uses were presented. In a lawsuit filed in a Boston district court under the False Claims Act (2010), Pfizer settled for $430 million.

The Neurotin case kicked off a string of lawsuits and record settlements: Bristol-Myers Squibb settled for $515 million (The US Department of Justice, 2007), Pfeizer settled for $2.3 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2009), Eli Lilly settled for $1.415 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2009), AstraZeneca settled for $520 million (The US Department of Justice, 2010), Abbott Labs settled for $1.5 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2012), GlaxoSmithKline settled for $3 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2012), and Johnson and Johnson settled for $2.2 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2013). These settlements all involved similar infractions around the off-label marketing of their products, including the psychiatric drugs Abilify (_aripiprazole_), Godeon (_ziprasidone_), Zyprexa (_olanzapine_), Seroquel (_quetiapine_), Depakote (_divalproex sodium_), Paxil (_paroxetine_), and Risperdal (_risperidone_), respectively. While the settlements were astronomical, they were dwarfed by the drugs' profits, and industry analysts are unsure if the fines will deter future infractions as they may simply be considered the price of doing business (Bobelian, 2013).

#Early-onset misconduct#

Zooming in from these broad highlights on the workings of the pharmaceutical industry, this past decade has witnessed a profound shift in our collective judgment of behavior in children in the U.S.,as childhood and risk itself are increasingly pathologized. The explosive rise in the controversial diagnosis of pediatric bipolar has received some coverage in the mainstream media, but these stories often serve to popularize the condition and neglect a deeper skepticism around its justification and treatment (Carey, 2007; Wallace-Well, 2009). Beyond prescribing kids Ritalin because they can't stop fidgeting, psychiatry has supplemented attention disorders with a more serious diagnosis and stronger, riskier treatments.With the profusion of bipolar diagnoses in children and its common treatment with powerful and dangerous atypical anti-psychotic medication, significant numbers of adolescents and teens are being chemically swaddled and sedated. Parents are under increasing pressure from teachers and other parents to "correct" their children's behavior with potent mind- and mood-altering drugs, often with devastating side-effects (Yan, 2008). Perhaps most worrisome is the growing tendency towards preventative treatment, and the call for earlier and earlier preemptive interventions before serious problems have manifested.

In 1995, a team of researchers affiliated with Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital published a landmark paper arguing that early-onset bipolar was far more common than previously thought (Wozniak & Biederman, et al., 1995). Biederman and Wozniak, who helped redefine the disorder and were at the forefront of the popularization of early-onset bipolar, developed their hypothesis to help explain treatment-resistant children in Biederman's ADHD clinic. They noticed that many of the children who did not respond to standard ADHD medications exhibited anger issues, as well as child-parent interaction problems. The researchers wondered if these difficult to treat children were grappling with more serious mood disorders, not impulse control. These difficult cases did not respond to standard ADHD medications, but did respond to standard bipolar medications, leading the researchers to reconsider their diagnosis. Biederman characterizes the state of the children he treats as dire: "We need to treat these children. They are in a desperate state... It's not that somebody comes to me after their child has a temper tantrum. They do things for years that are dangerous. These are things that profoundly affect the child," such as putting at risk their academic record, substance abuse or even suicide (Allen, 2007).

Psychiatric literature dating back to the 1920s documented a very small percentage of adult patients diagnosed with bipolar who recalled manic symptoms dating back to childhood. Child-onset mania was considered extremely rare. Wozniak and Biederman argue that, "juvenile mania may be common among referred children with severe psychopathology but that it may be difficult to diagnose". They point out that "developmental variations" have been made to accommodate the diagnosis of major depression in children, but that no such accommodations had been accepted for childhood mania. They proposed that the clinical picture of mania in children overlapped with the symptoms of Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), and was "predominantly irritable and mixed, and the course was chronic [instead of episodic]". They acknowledged that severe irritability was common in children, but differentiated "the type of irritability observed in our children with mania-like symptoms was very severe and often associated with violence... assaultive when irritable... resulting in throwing and breaking things, kicking down doors, and destroying property... 'affective storms'".

Prominent psychiatrists also advanced theories that went beyond the diagnosis of existing symptoms. With rationales that echo the prodromal theories I will return to later this chapter, leading researchers advocated for the treatment and prevention of _future_ episodes. In 2002 Time magazine ran a cover story called "Young and Bipolar" (Kluger & Song) featuring Demitri Papolos, the research director of the Juvenile Bipolar Research Foundation and co-author of the bestselling book, _The Bipolar Child_ (Papolos & Papolos, 1999). Papolos, who believes a characteristic pattern in bipolar children is difficulty waking up in the morning says, "if you don't catch it early on it gets worse, like a tumor." Kiki Chang, the director of the pediatric bipolar-disorders program at Stanford says: "We are interested in looking at medication not just to treat and prevent future episodes, but also to get in early and --- this is the controversial part --- to prevent the manic episode." Chang explains the "kindling theory" of mania, as the justification for the urgency of prevention: "Once you've had a manic episode, you've already crossed the threshold, you've jumped off the bridge: it's done. The chances that you're going to have another episode are extremely high." (Egan, 2008). From the start, pediatric bipolar has been closely associated with preventative treatment and has incorporated the logic of prodromal diagnoses.

The stakes of receiving this diagnosis are high. A psychiatric diagnosis is more than just an esoteric game of medical nosology. Bipolar is understood as a chronic, lifelong disorder, and children receiving this diagnosis are advised to continue pharmaceutical treatment for life. The first-line treatments for childhood bipolar are atypical-antipsychotics, drugs that have been shown to have dangerous side-effects including massive weight gain, metabolic disorders, tardive dyskinesia, and diabetes (Ücok and Gaebel,2008; Yan, 2008). The first-line treatments for adult bipolar are the relatively safer mood stabilizers such as Lithium or Depakote (Kowatch, Strawn & Sorter, 2009).

Not all psychiatrists agree with Biederman and Woziak's explanation. In a chapter titled "Bipolar in the Preschool Period" appearing in a definitive volume on the development and course of bipolar across the lifespan, the authors explain a central disagreement about the diagnosis of mania in children (Luby, Belden & Tandon, 2010). Some psychiatrists believe that children need to manifest discrete episodes of mania, as seen in adults, to meet the formal criteria for the diagnosis. Others believe that the temporal dimensions of the disorder should be adapted for children, allowing for rapid or continuous outbursts to qualify as episodes. Finally, others accept Biederman's and Wozniak's assertion that the classic symptoms of euphoria and grandiosity are replaced with severe irritability in children. These nuances are frequently neglected in studies and practice, creating great uncertainty about the prevalence and application of this diagnosis.

Proponents of the diagnosis believe that the number of bipolar children has not grown in recent years, rather we have gotten better at diagnosing it (Kluger & Song, 2002). Critics point out that there is no evidence that children diagnosed with bipolar manifested the disorder when they grew up, and that many adults with bipolar diagnoses did not report having uncontrolled anger issues when they were young (Stringaris & Goodman, 2009). Nonetheless, the diagnosis of pediatric bipolar took off. Gabrielle Carson, a psychiatric researcher at Stony Brook University, characterizes the "bipolar controversy" as the question of "whether a broader definition of mania with less clear-cut episodes and more concurrent comorbidity [specifically, ADHD] represents a developmentally altered condition which will change in adulthood, or a condition which, because of its earlier onset, has a worse prognosis" (Carlson, 2011). She believes that labeling children bipolar became popular for non-scientific reasons. Carson thinks that many of the children diagnosed with bipolar used to be labeled with conduct disorders, a condition resulting from "bad parenting, lousy environment, poor supervision", and one that insurance companies will not reimburse (Spiegel, 2012). She thinks that when clinical psychiatrists were encouraged to think of these behaviors as "bipolar" they thought "'Heck, if that's what it is, we have a bunch of medicines that are supposed to be helpful for mania --- maybe I can make it better.'". Some parents also found the diagnosis somewhat liberating, since its biological nature was perceived to be context-independent and relieved them of blame for their children's conduct.

There is evidence that other contributing factors may have influenced Biederman's tireless efforts to promote the pediatric bipolar diagnosis. As part of a congressional investigation into potential conflicts of interest between academic researchers and pharmaceutical companies, Senator Charles Grassley uncovered that Biederman failed to disclose to his employer over$1.6 millionin consulting fees from drugmakers earned between 2000 and 2007 (Harris and Carey,2008). Emails disclosed in a lawsuit, filed by parents who claimed Johnson & Johnson's Risperdal caused injury to their children, reveal Biederman in conversation with marketing executives at Johnson & Johnson. These emails imply that Biederman submitted ghost written papers for publication in scientific journals, and accepted payments to participate in Johnson & Johnson's Center for Education in the Study of Pediatric Bipolar (Harris,2008).One email from Biederman assured Johnson & Johnson that _planned_ studies "will support the safety and effectiveness of [Risperadal] risperidone in this age group,"effectively guaranteeing the outcome of the study before it was ever conducted (Harris,2009).

#Where science meets hope#

In recent years one organization has tried to position itself at the center of this conversation, with a strong belief in the power of science and data to find an answer. The _Child Mind Institute_ (CMI) was founded in 2009 by Dr. Harold Koplewicz, a psychiatrist and former NYU professor who is "committed to finding more effective treatments for childhood psychiatric and learning disorders, building the science of healthy brain development, and empowering children and their families with help, hope, and answers." (Child Mind Institute, n.d.) CMI has raised hundreds of millions of dollars in donations and funding, without accepting donations from pharmaceutical companies. Kaplowicz also runs a twin, for-profit clinical consultancy alongside the foundation, which primarily treats the children of the power elite, for rates listed at $1000 a session (Ellin, 2011). CMI's gala fundraisers have featured politicians and celebrities including Hilary Clinton, former New Jersey Governor Jon S. Corzine, Robert De Niro, Jimmy Buffet, Dr. Ruth Westheimer and George Stephenopoulos (Ellin, 2011; Child Mind Institute, n.d.).

Koplewicz's mission in life "is to remove any stigma from mental illness among children and teenagers, make it merely something to be managed and overcome as it was with dyslexia or attention deficit disorder before it." (Ellin, 2011) He explains CMI's philosophy and mission:

>We have patients, in our case children and adolescents, who desperately need help. These children may be out of control, overwhelmed by anxiety, dangerously aggressive, disorganized in their communication, floundering in school. We need to help them. Medications, often along with behavioral therapy, can have a transformative effect... Furthermore, falling back on pure non-pharmacological treatment is not the better alternative, since these treatments have rarely undergone objective evaluation. (Koplewicz, 2011)

The Child Mind Institutes' messaging is consistently pro-medication, and their anti-stigma campaigns wrap this message in a veneer of upbeat packaging. In the same breath they argue against stigma, they simultaneously promote language and framing that endorses the biomedical model of children's suffering. CMI regularly runs print advertising campaigns to raise awareness and reduce stigma around childhood mental illness. In 2012 they rented a gigantic billboard outside of Penn Station, in one of the busiest intersections in New York City, depicting children frolicking in a park with a tagline proclaiming that CMI was where "science meets hope". A similar billboard campaign plastered New York's remaining phone booths depicting an adolescent girl on a stool, surrounded by a thought bubble of fantasies (e.g. Travel to Fiji, I want to be a designer, Help my community), with the tagline "Children's Mental Health Matters---help all children realize their potential". These messages are on the surface positive, or at worst, innocuous. It is easy to imagine why so many politicians, industry leaders, and celebrities have endorsed this feel-good cause.

CMI's "symptom checker tool", available on their web site and intended to help parents learn more about children's mental health disorders, reveals their bias. The tool presents parents with a checklist of behaviors, of the form "My child is...." Descriptors include: disobedient, impulsive or hyperactive, having problems in school, has sleeping problems, has trouble paying attention, has excessive fears, worries, or very unusual thoughts, etc (Child Mind Institute, n.d.). Depending on your selections, more detailed behavioral descriptions follow, along with a chance to share your family's psychiatric history. The branching paths all lead to additional information about a dozen different disorders, including major depressive disorder, somatic symptom disorder, conduct disorder, panic disorder, bipolar disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, and separation anxiety disorder. While the tool repeatedly encourages parents to seek the advice and diagnosis of a professional, none of the paths lead away from diagnosable disorders, and all paths through the survey lead parents to think about their children's behavior within the model CMI promotes.

To complicate the story further, Koplewicz was one of the co-authors on the infamous "Study 329" (Keller et al, 2001), a clinical trial conducted between 1994 and 1998 to study the effectiveness of Paxil (_paroxetine_) in children. The article was ghost-written by an industry sponsored public relations firm to downplay the study's findings (McGoey and Jackson, 2009). It deceptively inflated the efficacy of the drug, which was no more effective than a placebo, and covered up side effects appearing in adolescent subjects such as suicidal thinking. This study prompted New York Attorney General Elliot Spitzer to file suit against GlaxoSmithKline for fraud, since they had selectively withheld evidence of unsuccessful trials and negative side-effects (Harris, 2004). This study later became central evidence in the $3 billion federal settlement against GlaxoSmithKline (The US Department of Justice, 2012). One hopes that the "objective evaluations" Koplewicz wishes for non-pharmacological treatments conform to a higher standard than study 329.

Biederman and Koplewicz are two of psychiatry's leading voices promoting a reevaluation of how society judges and treats childhood behavior. They shroud themselves in the objectivity of science, and seem uninterested in the range of causes that may underlie the irritability and behavioral misconduct they recommend treating pharmacologically. Systemic adjustments to children's nutrition, sleep, stress, poverty, oppression or education are not their primary concern. Reform in these areas could ameliorate symptoms by addressing their root causes, but for mainstream psychiatry the treatment of childhood's mental health is focused on treating symptoms, not causes. Or, to put it another way, they are satisfied with biological and genetic explanations as the penultimate cause, and rarely explore environmental causal chains. The scandalous patterns of borderline-legal, conflicts-of-interest and cover-ups contribute to feelings of cynicism among activists. Their righteousness and self-confidence is especially troubling. From their writings, both Biederman and Koplewicz come across as true believers who genuinely want to help children and improve their life conditions. They never discuss how the systems they (and their patients) are embedded in are rotten to the core. Perhaps, if their teams were composed of interdisciplinary specialists alongside patients, peers and activists these star researchers might cede some of their objectivity-fueled confidence, and start paying more attention to the causes and implications of the treatments they promote. The treatments they trumpet create a great deal of misery and their cost-benefit analysis is far from clear.

#Atypical Childhoods Lost#

Challenging psychiatric methods and paradigms, questioning the validity of pharmaceutical research, and protesting the political processes of mental health policy, are nothing new. What is new here is the heightened focus on childhood behaviors and preemptive interventions. As a category, the diagnosis and treatment of children is a highly provocative topic. As with other human rights issues such as shoddy labor conditions, extreme poverty, disease and hunger, all suffering is deplorable; even more so when the sufferers are children. Children continue to be regarded as innocent, and without the ability to fully consent to treatments the moral responsibility for their well-being falls on their parents, doctors and teachers. Children can never truly grant consent around any form of treatment, and their power to consent is entrusted to their parents or guardians. Our collective projections of our own failures coupled with the opportunity to redeem the next generation raise the ante around these issues.

Before presenting more facts and statistics about the rise of pediatric bipolar, I will introduce a few powerful anecdotes that vividly illustrate the human contours of this growing controversy. Consider the case of Rebecca Reily, a four-year-old girl in Boston who died on December 2006 after an overdose of the anti-psychotic Seroquel, administered by her parents (Creamer and Mishra, 2007; Couric, 2007). Her parents were both charged with murder and in their defense claimed to be following doctor's orders. They had obtained SSI benefits for the siblings and for themselves, to the tune of $30,000 per year, and were applying for benefits for Rebecca when she died. Her mother was found guilty of second-degree murder, and her father was convicted of first-degree murder, and both were sentenced to life in prison (Lambert, 2014).Rebecca's psychiatrist, Dr. Kayoko Kifuji, diagnosed her with attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder and bipolar disorder whens he was just _two and a half years old_, and prescribed a powerful cocktail of psychotropic medications. Dr. Kifuji's license was not suspended, although she voluntarily suspended her practice pending the resolution of the outstanding civil and criminal charges (Wen,2009). Her hospital has issued the statement: "The care we provided was appropriate and within responsible professional standards" (Creamer and Mishra, 2007).

Sadly, this case is not an isolated occurrence. Reports surfaced in 2006 about another three-year-old girl, Destiny Hager, who died in April 2006 of complications resulting from known side-effects of the antipsychotics Seroquel and Godeon (Carpenter, 2009). An autopsy of the 38-lb girl revealed "antipsychotic drugs present in concentrations considered therapeutic in adults" (Carpenter, 2009). Her psychiatrist, Vernon Kliewer, who had been practicing children's psychiatry for over fifty years, was investigated by the Kansas Board of healing arts for his treatment of Destiny and five other children aged two to five years old. Kliewer negotiated a settlement that didn't require him to admit any wrongdoing, and he has voluntarily stopped treating patients under age six (Carpenter, 2009).

In January 2008, PBS Frontline aired an hour-long documentary called _The_ _Medicated_ _Child_, profiling the lives of three children diagnosed between four to six years old with bipolar disorder (Garviria, 2008). The children and their families were all struggling with devastating side-effects and complications, such as involuntary tics and spasms (_tardive dyskinesia_) and extreme weight gain, resulting from their treatment. The documentary argued that a massive public health experiment is currently being conducted on the nation's youth, without anyone's informed consent (Garviria, 2008). In one segment a mother was feeding her son corndogs, Gatorade, Goldfish crackers, and cookies, while she complained on-camera about his erratic hyperactive behavior. For decades studies have suggested links between junk food and hyperactivity in children, and evidence continues to accrue that artificial food coloring causes ADHD symptoms (Arnold, Lofthouse & Hurt, 2012). The filmmakers may have included this shot to call attention to the irony of the son's diet, his mother's complaints about his behavior and the neglect of his treatment team to explore these connections.

In one segment, a psychiatrist goads a young girl into sharing her violent fantasies, though the doctor fails to explore the connections to her father's trauma as an Iraqi war veteran. In another, a mother makes an appointment to reduce her son's medications but is told by their psychiatrist that drugs are the only therapeutic option. She leaves the office with an additional prescription for Xanax to relieve her son's first-day-of-school anxiety.

These anecdotes are not meant to imply that all children receiving diagnoses are grappling with superficial problems, or are being harshly punished for their misconduct. There are many reports of cases where children exhibit extremely violent and threatening patterns of behavior, including explosive rage, biting, punching, kicking and even knife wielding (Kluger & Song, 2002; Egan, 2008). Parents have banded together in online and in-person support groups, and report violent and aggressive behavior that includes violent threats, self-harm, and serious assaults (Papolos & Papolos, 2007). Some parents have exhausted alternatives to medication, feel genuinely threatened and unsafe, and are at a loss for how to help their children. However, these extreme cases mask the more common occurrence of the medicalization of misconduct and the role of drugs in punitive discipline.

Just as drug companies popularized mild depression in Japan, childhood moodiness and irritability is being marketed as a medical condition. For the ordinary psychiatrist, school psychologist, social worker or foster parent in the field, the spectrum of symptoms is confusing, and the reliability of diagnoses is known to vary tremendously (Egan, 2008). In the course of my fieldwork, I met numerous people who felt they were wronged by psychiatry, their lives turned miserable by side-effects and neglect. Many believe they are better off without psychiatric care, though many ambivalently continue to seek treatment, even if it is at arm's length. A disturbing trend I noticed was that, over the years, people I met had entered the system at younger and younger ages. Many could not remember a time in their lives that they were drug-free.

The atypical anti-psychotics prescribed for childhood bipolar are hardly innocuous. Common side-effects I have already mentioned include massive weight gain, metabolic disorders, diabetes, tardive dyskinesia. In November 2008 the _Wall _ _Street_ _Journal_'s health blog reported on a class action lawsuit brought against Jansen (owned by Johnson & Johnson) for the side-effects of their antipsychotic Risperdal causing gynecomcastia, or male breast growth, in ten young boys (Mundy, 2008; Couric, 2009). Boys ranging from four to fourteen years old have been prescribed Risperdal for ADHD and bipolar disorder, and have developed female breasts that can only be treated with mastectomies.

These stories are horrifying, but they are not exceptions. In 2007 in Florida 23 infants under 1 years old were prescribed antipsychotics, prompting a perfunctory review process for all Medicaid prescriptions of antipsychotics to children under six (Hundley, 2009). Between 1994–2003 the diagnosis of bipolar in American children and adolescents has jumped 40-fold, or 4000 percent (Carey, 2007; Moreno, Laje, Blanco, Jiang, Schmidt, & Olfson., 2007). This statistic is somewhat misleading since the absolute number of children, ages 0-20 receiving this diagnosis in 1994 was small (25 out of 100,000, or about 16,000), but the rate of increase was enormous (jumping to 1003 out of 100,000, or about 725,000) (The United States Census Bureau, n.d.). The authors of this study based their estimates on a statistically meaningful sample (N=962) of the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. They lament that "[t]here is currently a dearth of information concerning national trends in the diagnosis of bipolar disorder among children and adolescents and the treatments that these young people receive."

Since then, estimates of children's diagnoses have proven more challenging to discover, as researchers have begun tracking atypical-antipsychotics, prescribed for any indication, including ADHD, autism, bipolar, oppositional defiance disorder, and the newly coined Temper Dysregulation Disorder. The Medco report on _America's State of Mind_ (2011) reports the number of 10-19 year olds prescribed anti-psychotics is now around 1% (or about 420,000 teens), double the number from a decade earlier (The United States Census Bureau, n.d.).

In an opinion piece published in the journal of _Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health,_ Gabrielle Carlson attributes this surge in diagnoses to the increased coverage in the mainstream media. She cites books such as the bestselling The Bipolar Child (Papolos & Papolos, 2000), which is now in its third edition and has sold over 200,000 copies, according to Amazon. The author's web site, bipolarchild.com, publishes a newsletter, sells accompanying DVDs and invites visitors to request consultations and referrals. Both Carlson and the authors of the 2007 study credit the 2002 Time magazine cover feature on "Young and Bipolar" (Kluger & Song, 2002) for a surge in public awareness. Finally, the authors of the 2007 study cite a 2003 _CBS Evening News_ broadcast that profiled a child misdiagnosed with ADHD, whose situation greatly improved when he received his bipolar diagnosis, and switched from taking Adderall to Lithium (Holguin). These authors do not offer any specific evidence that this media coverage caused the surge in diagnoses, but they do report anecdotal evidence of parents citing these media sources, and others like them, when visiting psychiatrists and primary care physicians.

Psychologists such as Ross Green, author of _The Explosive Child_ (2007) and Mary Kurcinka, author of _Raising Your Spirited Child_ (1998) advocate for dealing with childhood misconduct by introducing alternative language, mediation styles and parenting techniques. Alternative explanations for irritability in children abound, as studies have shown that improved nutrition can reduce violence and behavioral unrest in prisons and schools (Laurance, 2008), and research demonstrates that sleep deprivation leads to hyperactivity and irritability (Brody, 2007). They do not rule out the use of pharmaceutical treatments, but believe they are being over prescribed, and are only one piece of a larger puzzle. Ultimately, no one really has a simple solution dealing with these troubled youth, and each case presents unique difficulties and challenges.

As Mary Kurchinka explains in _Raising your Spirited Child_, language and labels are extremely powerful (Kurcinka,1998). We always have a choice to describe identical behaviors with words that carry different connotations. Are children acting: explosive/spirited, demanding/high standards, unpredictable/flexible, loud/enthusiastic, argumentative/opinionated, stubborn/assertive, nosy/curious, wild/energetic, manipulative/charismatic, impatient/compelling, anxious/cautious, explosive/dramatic, picky/selective, distractible/perceptive (Kurcinka,1998)?These simple descriptive choices construct and perpetuate vastly different worlds. They communicate expectations as well as reinforce condemnation or support.

According to Lloyd deMause, a prominent psychoanalyst and historian of childhood, child abuse extends deeply and broadly throughout human histories and cultures, and is far more widespread than most of us are prepared to admit (DeMause, 1982). The notion that parents and teachers are receiving a blessing from medical authorities to "shut their kids up" is an important concern not to be dismissed out of hand. Similarly, structural biases such as racism, classism and oppression continue to correlate strongly with treatment practices and outcomes (Link & Phelan, 1995; Metzl, 2010, 2014; Linares, 2013).

#Diagnostic wormholes#

During this period of rampant increase in the treatment of pediatric bipolar, it needs to be noted that the diagnosis did not exist in the then current version of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual, DSM-IV-TR, the official guide to mental disorders published by the American Psychiatric Association. According to the DSM-IV-TR, bipolar was only recognized in patients older than 18. This period witnessed the manufacturing of a new disease, a common occurrences when releasing new versions of the DSM, but rare in-between editions.

The antipsychotics administered to these children were prescribed "off-label" (Shekelle et al., 2007).As the record-breaking court settlements described earlier indicate, drug companies have been involved in numerous scandals around marketing drugs for off-label uses. A 2009 study found that between August 2006 and July 2007, 37 percent of prescriptions for anti-psychotic drugs were written by family doctors---general practitioners, not psychiatric specialists (Morgan).

In summer 2008 the FDA legislated pediatric bipolar into existence so that clinical trials could proceed prior to the publication of the DSM-V in 2013 (Dawdy, 2008). The FDA evaded inquiries demanding a definition of the disorder, and finally supplied thin, circular evidence for its existence (Dawdy, 2008).In 2008, the FDA's press secretary, Sandy Welsh wrote an email to Dawdy in an apparent response to an email campaign from his readers demanding an explanation:

>The FDA does accept the validity of pediatric bipolar disorder. The FDA agrees with peer-reviewed journal articles, academics and clinicians that say that pediatric bipolar disorder can occur in children and adolescents and is a serious, chronic illness which causes shifts in a person's mood, energy, and ability to function.

>The FDA, a science-based agency... according to the National Institute of Mental Health: Research findings, clinical experience, and family accounts provide substantial evidence that bipolar disorder, also called manic-depressive illness, can occur in children and adolescents. Bipolar disorder is difficult to recognize and diagnose in youth, however, because it does not fit precisely the symptom criteria established for adults, and because its symptoms can resemble or co-occur with those of other common childhood-onset mental disorders. In addition, symptoms of bipolar disorder may be initially mistaken for normal emotions and behaviors of children and adolescents. But unlike normal mood changes, bipolar disorder significantly impairs functioning in school, with peers, and at home with family. (Dawdy, 2008).

In her email, Welsh cites a narrow range of studies justifying the equivalent diagnosis of mania for children who manifest different symptoms than adults. They show that children and adults responded to the same bipolar medications, in this case, the anti-psychotics _Abilify_ and _Risperdal_. One longitudinal study she cites titled the "Clinical course of children and adolescents with bipolar spectrum disorders" bootstraps the illness by presuming it exists, and then, designed studies to track its predictors and course (Birmaher et al, 2006). Welsh also cites a meta-study endorsed by the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (McClellan, 2007) which itself states:

>[It is not] clear whether the atypical forms of juvenile mania and the classic adult form of the disorder represent the same illness. The debate and controversy over juvenile bipolar disorder are not whether there are a significant number of youths who are explosive, dysregulated, and emotionally labile or whether these youths suffer significant impairment or are at risk for a variety of adverse outcomes, including substance abuse. These difficulties and concerns are commonplace, especially in community mental health settings and systems of care that deal with at-risk youths (e.g., juvenile justice, foster care). The debate is whether these problems in youths are best characterized as bipolar disorder and, more important, whether juvenile mania is the same illness as that classically described in adults. (McClellan, Kowatch & Findling, 2007)

Critics of the FDA's decision claim they based their decision a very small number of relatively small number of trials whose lead authors were part of "cabal" advocating for the recognition of pediatric bipolar, including Biederman, Wozniak, Carlson. It is no surprise that influential psychiatric researchers were cited in the studies---their labs are extraordinarily successful, and their papers are cited widely. What is most disappointing is that the meta-study did not adequately represent psychiatrists opposed to approving the disorder. Instead of calling for further studies, or a provisional approval pending clinical trials to proceed, the FDA pulled the trigger and approved the condition without further debate. As a reminder of the stakes, their own list of recommendations includes the warning that "Most Youths With Bipolar I Disorder Will Require Ongoing Medication Therapy to Prevent Relapse; Some Individuals Will Need Lifelong Treatment" (McClellan, Kowatch & Findling, 2007).

In 2007 the FDA approved Johnson & Johnson's _Risperdal_ for use in children as young as ten, and the approval for Bristol-Myers Squibb's _Abilify_ followed in 2008 (Office of the Commissioner, 2007). In 2009 an FDA advisory panel backed the expanded use of three commonly prescribed antipsychotic drugs for children – Lilly's _Zyprexa_, AstraZeneca's _Seroquel_ and Pfizer's _Geodon_ (Dawdy, 2009). As mentioned above, common side-effects for this class of drugs includes massive weight gain, metabolic disorders, tardive dyskinesia, and diabetes, and multiple class action suites are underway alleging damages for their use (Ücok and Gaebel, 2008). The long-term effects on developing children are still unknown (Heavy, 2009).

Even within the psychiatric community, there is little consensus about pediatric bipolar diagnoses and treatments. All the way back in 2000, psychiatrist Dr. Lawrence Diller wrote the following in a story published by Salon.com. The situation has worsened dramatically since then.

>Diagnosing bipolar disorder in children as young as 3 has become the latest rage. It justifies using a host of medications to treat very difficult-to-manage, unhappy children. The old-line drug, lithium [previously approved for children older than 12], has been replaced by newer, untested (in children) mood stabilizers like Neurontin or Depakote as a first-choice intervention for pediatric "manic depression." Finally, a new class of anti-psychotic medications – the most popular these days is Risperdal – is heralded as the ultimately effective treatment for a number of diagnoses whose common features are not hallucinations or psychosis, but severe acting-out behaviors.

>More than 200,000 children receive anti-psychotic medications, mostly to control unruly behavior rather than to treat hallucinations or other symptoms of schizophrenia.

>No other society prescribes psychoactive medications to children the way we do. We use 80 percent of the world's stimulants such as Ritalin. Only Canada comes close to our rates, using half, per capita, the amounts we do. Europe and industrialized Asia use one-10th of what we do. Psychiatrists in those countries are perplexed and worried about trends in America. The use of psychoactive drugs other than Ritalin for preteen children is virtually unheard of outside this country. (Diller, 2000).

A handful of academic researchers (Crystal et al., 2009), independent journalists such as Philip Dawdy of Furious Seasons.com (Dawdy, 2007) and activists have been closely following these developments. As we discussed above, mainstream media outlets lightly covered the controversy, often functioning more as cheerleaders from the sidelines. They have tracked and documented the dramatic increases in childhood diagnoses and prescriptions, and raised concerns over the long-term safety of these drugs due to their serious side-effects and known developmental and metabolic issues.They have pointed out the discrepancies between American and international diagnoses (Lane, 2009), as well as the more aggressive prescription patterns for children covered by Medicaid versus those covered by private insurance (Martin et al., 2002). Despite this,the rates of diagnoses and prescriptions continue to surge (Wilson,2009).

Pediatric bipolar is a disorder that never existed in DSM-IV-TR, does not exist as a distinct diagnosis in DSM-5, and is presented as a part of the main bipolar disorder entry as if it had always existed. In the years leading up to the release of DSM-5, the FDA approved clinical trials for the distinct 'pediatric bipolar' diagnosis, but it has since been folded into the criteria for ordinary bipolar disorder. The DSM-5 description of bipolar now includes caveats that only apply to children, such as the indications for depressive episodes:

>Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful). ( #Note:# In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

Or, the paragraphs explaining the differences in the ways mania presents in children:

>In children, happiness, silliness and "goofiness" are normal in the context of special occasions; however, if these symptoms are recurrent, inappropriate to the context, and beyond what is expected for the developmental level of the child, they may meet [the criterion for a manic episode]... In children, overestimation of abilities and belief that, for example, they are the best at a sport or the smartest in the class is normal; however, when such beliefs are present despite clear evidence to the contrary or the child attempts feats that are clearly dangerous and, most important, represent a change from the child's normal behavior, the grandiosity criterion should be considered satisfied. (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

In another last minute play, the editorial board of the DSM-5 incorporated in their 2010 draft an entirely new childhood disorder: Temper Dysregulation Disorder (with Dysphoria). It was proposed in response to the criticism of the overdiagnosis of bipolar in irritable children, meant to provide an escape valve for doctors who did not want to saddle a child with the stigma of a bipolar diagnosis. A number of psychiatrists published their concerns with the last minute addition to the manual:

>We believe that currently there is insufficient scientific support to include TDD as a unique diagnostic entity. Furthermore, we believe that the inclusion of TDD will have an adverse impact on patient care, research, and the general public's perception of child psychiatry. (Axelson et al, 2011)

Their main criticisms were that the disorder "is a symptom, not a syndrome". The diagnosis overlaps extensively with existing disorders, and the criteria do not provide any way to distinguish between TDD and the co-occurrence of severe explosive outbreaks in mood, anxiety, conduct and autism spectrum disorders. They feared that the media implied the diagnosis would lead to more psychosocial treatments, but they cynically acknowledge that "the rationale that TDD will reduce the inappropriate use of medication in children and adolescents with temper outbursts also seems at odds with perceptions of how the pharmaceutical industry approaches the _DSM_." Given pharma's modus operandi, TDD might begin as a way for children to avoid a bipolar diagnosis and the accompanying anti-psychotic treatments, but would soon have similar treatment recommendations. Finally, they demonstrate an awareness and concern over the reputation of child psychiatry in the media:

>The media is rife with charges that psychiatry pathologizes normal behavior and turns misbehavior and character flaws into medical disorders, thereby absolving individuals from responsibility for their actions. Skeptical and humorous reports have already surfaced in the media about how temper outbursts in children are now going to be classified as a disease and that the _DSM-5_ will have a "temper-tantrum" disorder.

The 2013 publication of the DSM-5 includes both Temper Dysregulation Disorder, as well as the updated bipolar criteria describing overlapping symptoms in children. I will return to the controversies around the publication of the DSM-5 in Chapter 4 where I detail my visit to the 2012 American Psychiatric Association conference. To many of the protesters it seemed like psychiatry was unilaterally defining the parameters of normal childhood behavior, was manufacturing new disorders out of thin air, and was making it up as they were going along.

#Pathological Soothsayers#

If these trends are not sufficiently jarring, the future is even more disconcerting. Psychiatry continues to innovate, and is poised to push beyond pathologizing formerly normal behaviors by pathologizing _risk_with the growing rise of _prodromal_diagnoses, also known as _Psychotic __Risk__ Syndrome_. The etymology of this word traces back to a Greek term meaning "running before" or precursor (Prodromal, n.d.). An emerging trend in clinical psychiatry is the appropriation of this concept under the paradigm of "early intervention in psychosis" for "at-risk" patients.

Psychiatrists are starting to preventively diagnose mental illness and are treating people before they exhibit any behavioral symptoms. Children and adolescents are especially vulnerable to prodromal diagnoses, and much of the research and marketing is directed at preventing children from developing mental illnesses later in life. We saw this tendency at work in the competing definitions for pediatric bipolar, and the emphasis on preventing "first breaks" due to the "kindling effect" hypothesis. The Papoloses explain this idea in _The Bipolar Child_:

>Initial periods of cycling may begin with an environmental stressor, but if the cycles continue or occur unchecked, the brain becomes kindled or sensitized - pathways inside the central nervous system are reinforced so to speak - and future episodes of depression, hypomania, or mania will occur by themselves (independently of an outside stimulus), with greater and greater frequency. (Papolos & Papolos, 2000)

This logic, taken to its natural conclusion, led researchers to search for ways to identify and prevent first psychotic breaks before they occurred. The Editor in Chief of the peer-reviewed journal _Current Psychiatry_ identifies early diagnosis and intervention as one of the top six trends affecting all of psychiatry, not just child psychiatry:

>_Earlier diagnosis and early intervention_

>The past decade has witnessed a surge of progress in identifying individuals at high risk for psychosis or mood disorders. The "prodrome" has become a fertile area of research, with a focus on early "treatment" even before the clinical syndrome of schizophrenia or mania appears. The goal is to try to delay, modify, or ameliorate incipient serious mental illness by using both pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. (Nasrallah, 2009)

Intuitively, preventative health care seems like a good thing. In the words of Benjamin Franklin, "an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure", and a modern variation of the Hipppocratic Oath includes the line "I will prevent disease whenever I can, for prevention is preferable to cure". Western medicine is often criticized for primarily responding to acute crises, instead of proactively promoting health and well-being. However, the reductionist flattening of minds into brains leads to categorical errors which pervert the Hippocratic principle to "do no harm." Applying the medical paradigm to the treatment of risks, instead of disorders, stretches the dangerously elastic diagnostic net beyond breaking point. Especially when many of the preventative treatments carry substantial risks of their own, the calculus of prevention is dangerously skewed. Many psychiatric patients feel their treatments are worse than their diseases; how much more so when the risk of a disease is being targeted?

Analogies between mental conditions and diseases of the body, such as diabetes, measles, or heart failure, are often the point of departure for proponents of prodromal treatment. However, these casual comparisons mask assumptions and disguise relevant differences. The pathologization of diverse mental states remains controversial, unlike life-threatening viruses or organ failures. Furthermore, there is currently no causal theory explaining why some people's psychological experiences degenerate into crisis, or consensus on what constitutes an appropriate response to traumatic circumstances. Without a causal theory explaining transitions between mental states, all prodromal diagnoses of mental conditions are necessarily speculative approaches to correlations. It is unclear if such models are universally generalizable. Preventative treatment based on aggregates is highly questionable, especially considering the serious risks these treatments pose.

The roots of prodromal diagnosis of mental conditions can be traced back to work on the prodromal identification of schizophrenia:

What is needed is not the early diagnosis of schizophrenia, but the diagnosis of pre-psychotic schizophrenia. We must learn to recognize that state of mind which will develop into schizophrenia unless appropriate measures are taken to prevent deterioration (Meares, 1959:55).

However, the identification of reliable predictors of schizophrenia has proven to be notoriously difficult and conceptually slippery:

>Identifying symptoms or signs that reliably predict onset would obviously aid attempts to prevent mental disorders. Such specific predictors do not currently exist. In fact, one could argue that if any such risk factors were identified they would be conceptualized as early phenomena of the disorder itself... The nonspecific nature of these common features is notable (Yung et al., 1996: 285).

Yung et al describe the difficulties identifying prodromal symptoms for psychosis. The onset of psychosis is often "gradual" and "low-grade". Also, unlike contracting the measles, an all or nothing proposition, psychosis exists on a continuum, involving degrees of clinical judgment. To detect the onset of psychosis, clinicians can be attentive to "attenuated" or "subthreshold" symptoms, but these precursor signs and symptoms quickly become symptoms for the disorder itself. Contenders for early indications of subsequent development of psychosis include: a) selective attention and perceptual abnormalities; b) a change in the sense of self and the world; and, c) suspiciousness.

The clinical gaze embodied in the pages of the DSM has always been rooted in the psychological theory of Behaviorism (Skinner, 1974) – the symptoms it defines are all observable behaviors, and are oblivious to the subject's interior mental life. The trend towards prodromal mental diagnoses is flawed precisely because of the kind of power it cedes to an already arrogant apparatus, which, as we will demonstrate in upcoming chapters, fails to listen to the voices of the people it purports to treat. The risks of preemptive discipline and prescriptive moral judgment present a slippery slope which psychiatry has already begun to descend, and are simply too great and damaging for this practice to continue. Patients, especially children, are being indicted on the basis of hereditary factors, thought crimes, and harmless deviant behavior. In a distinctly Orwellian twist, patients exhibiting symptoms are psychotic, while those that don't exhibit symptoms, yet, are prodromal (Orwell, 1961).

Furthermore, the psychopharmacological treatments prescribed for these prodromal diagnoses are physically dangerous and psychologically damaging. As already discussed, the atypical antipsychotics that are often prescribed in these circumstances have been linked to excessive weight gain, metabolic disorders, and diabetes (Yan, 2008). The stigma attached to these diagnoses is also emotionally threatening. Advertising campaigns, such as the award-winning "Prescribe Early" poster, depicted an abandoned wallet, teddy bear and keys on a barren street. It targeted parent's worst fears by invoking the terror of a missing child. It suggested this worst-case situation could be avoided with preventative pharmaceutical interventions, prescribed before it was "too late" (Rosenberg, 2009).

Children and teens often traverse intractable emotional terrain on their journey of self-discovery and becoming. Adult disapproval towards behaviors (smoking, drinking, inappropriate speech or activity, irritability) and appearances (fashion, body piercing, hairstyle) has increasingly taken the form of chemical discipline, with psychiatry's permission and blessing (White, Anjum and Schulz, 2006). Defiant teenagers are threatened with prodromal diagnoses based on their alternative fashion choices and misunderstood behavior. Smoking and substance abuse have already been associated with bipolar in teens, and are already being used as diagnostic criteria for the "illness" (Wilens et al., 2008). A recent article in the _American Journal of Psychiatry_ introduces the following patient and explores if this teenage girl is prodromal for schizophrenia:

>A 13-year-old girl, currently in the eighth grade and with a history of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, was brought by her mother to a university-affiliated outpatient psychiatric clinic after a gradual decline in her academic performance was noted... She had tasted alcohol in the past but denied current use. She had also used marijuana a half-dozen times ... her parents claimed that she had been withdrawn and had appeared sad and that at times they needed to prompt her to take a shower. She had a maternal aunt with bipolar affective disorder and a great uncle who had been institutionalized for unknown reasons ... she was dressed in Goth attire, including a black T-shirt with images of letters dripping blood; she had dyed black hair. Her affect was blunted but was slightly more animated when her parents left the room. She denied thoughts of suicide. She reported occasionally hearing whispering voices calling her name and saying that she is worthless. She also reported the belief that her friends did not like her as much as they had... (White et al., 2006: 376)

I do not know anything more about this case than the short blurb presented at the beginning of this journal article. Clearly, this eighth grader seems to be experiencing a great deal of emotional pain, and has found cultural styles to express her anger. The whispering voices that she reports hearing may or may not be a cause of alarm, as many more people report hearing voices without negative consequences than is widely believed (The British Psychological Society, 2014). Similarly, her disappointing academic performance may also be attributed to numerous factors, but White et. al. only consider one: "the presence of cognitive decline raises the possibility of a degenerative neurological disorder." Of course, the entire framework for explaining this girl's state of mind is clinical, but it is still striking read this language and consider all the competing explanations that are left unexplored:

>The clinical vignette reflects these challenges. The early adolescent patient presents with a number of symptoms consistent with a schizophrenia prodrome, including a long-standing history of difficulties with attention, a recent history of cognitive decline, social withdrawal, and what appears to be psychotic symptoms. Yet these symptoms could also be explained in terms of major depression with psychotic features, bipolar affective disorder, substance use disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or even an aberration in the maturation and solidification of personality structure. Furthermore, these diagnoses are complicated by their emergence within the developmental framework of the child, and thus developmental norms must also be taken into account.

There are many environmental factors that could explain the emergence of these "symptoms", and ways to understand them as reasonable reactions, not a pathological disorder. Caring parents are often desperate to help their struggling children, and will try anything that might "fix" the problems they perceive. In my opinion, this girl needs more compassionate support, not a stigmatizing diagnosis. Just as there is slippage between onset symptoms and true symptoms, the lines between diagnosis of 'schizophrenic prodrome' and 'schizophrenic' is also blurred. The treatments are similar, the stigma is similar, and the impact on someone's identity is likely similar as well. In this scenario, it is unclear if psychosocial support options have been exhausted, or the circumstances leading up to her visit to the psychiatrist. Situations like this scream out of the kinds of community oriented, peer-support structures that are advocated by activists and alternative mental health initiatives.

The trend towards prodromal diagnoses coincides with a parallel trend in society towards the auto-classification and prediction of citizen and consumer behavior (Andrejevic, 2007). Governments and corporations have a strong interest in predictive behavioral models of every person they monitor (Stanley and Steinhardt, 2003). These systems are currently making their way off the lab bench, and into production systems (Robert, 2005). Already, algorithms to automatically classify human behavior based only on video streams have been deployed in nursing homes, casinos, the Olympics, and urban environments (IBM Smart Surveillance Solution, n. d.; Informedia Digital Video Understanding, n. d.). As computers scientists and engineers contend with the challenge of automatically classifying the full range of human behaviors, the DSM's ready-made ontology may prove too convenient to challenge. Just as code enacts law, diagnostic labels are on their way to being represented in software, where their embodiment will take on a life of its own---algorithmic diagnoses. When that occurs we will have seen the successful establishment of a new diagnostic environment; indeed, a system that opaquely collects, categorizes, interprets, and proffers definitions of illness similarly to the way Google defines news – that is to say, with what amounts to an arbitrary sort of logic and rigor.

Such a future for psychiatry would be quite disturbing. Prodromal treatment is the latest progression in an ever-constricting system of social control which purports to contain states of mind within definitional cages. Preventative psychiatric treatment hints at forms of control that raise legitimate questions about omniscient surveillance, and we can begin to glimpse how grotesque these practices might become in an era of pervasive surveillance and electronic medical records. As I describe in more detail in chapter 6, a study currently underway in Australia is attempting to predict the onset of manic episodes based on changes in Facebook use (The FAD Study, 2014). Pathologizing the neurologically diverse is bad enough. Extending this attitude, and treatment, to those at risk of neurological diversity is ethically dubious and threatens our fundamental freedoms.

#Ferocious Attacks and Formulaic Defenses#

In the summer of 2011, Harold Koplewicz wrote column in the Huffington Post responding to Marcia Angell's favorable reviews of three books in _The New York Review of Books_ (Angell, 2011). Angell reviewed _The Emperor's New Drugs: Exploding the Antidepressant Myth_ (Kirsch, 2010) written by a UK psychologist, _Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric Drugs, and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in America_ (Whitaker, 2010) written by an American journalist, and _Unhinged: The Trouble With Psychiatry---A Doctor's Revelations About a Profession in Crisis_ (Carlat, 2010) written by a Boston psychiatrist.

In her review, Angell depicts the growth mental illness as an epidemic, citing similar statistics to the ones I presented at the beginning of this chapter. She points out that that "nowadays, treatment by medical doctors nearly always means psychoactive drugs, that is, drugs that affect the mental state", and that "the shift from "talk therapy" to drugs as the dominant mode of treatment coincides with the emergence over the past four decades of the theory that mental illness is caused primarily by chemical imbalances in the brain that can be corrected by specific drugs." She asks, along with the authors she reviews:

>What is going on here? Is the prevalence of mental illness really that high and still climbing? Particularly if these disorders are biologically determined and not a result of environmental influences, is it plausible to suppose that such an increase is real? Or are we learning to recognize and diagnose mental disorders that were always there? On the other hand, are we simply expanding the criteria for mental illness so that nearly everyone has one? And what about the drugs that are now the mainstay of treatment? Do they work? If they do, shouldn't we expect the prevalence of mental illness to be declining, not rising?

Angell characterizes the books' arguments as documenting a "frenzy of diagnosis, the overuse of drugs with sometimes devastating side effects, and widespread conflicts of interest. She wants us to stop thinking about "psychoactive drugs as the best, and often the only treatment for mental illness or emotional distress", claims that our reliance on them "tends to close off other options", and calls for more research studying alternative treatments and their inclusion in medical textbooks. Regarding problems with troubled children, often in "troubled families in troubled circumstances", she recommends that "[t]reatment directed at these environmental conditions---such as one-on-one tutoring to help parents cope or after-school centers for the children---should be studied and compared with drug treatment."

In the second part of her review Angell added the DSM to the list of books she reviewed. Discussing the upcoming release of DSM-5, she recognized the book's "extraordinary influence within American society." She also reviewed the multiplication of diagnoses with each edition and extensive industry sponsorship.

Koplewicz calls Angell's review a "ferocious two-part attack... on antidepressants, antipsychotics and, in general, medications to treat psychiatric disorders... she impugns both the medications and the motives of the psychiatric profession". He accuses Angell of being a conspiracy theorist who sees "a conspiracy of psychiatrists and drug companies for their mutual benefit, with patient benefit only a distant concern". Strangely, Koplewicz only responds directly to Angell's critique, not to authors she is reviewing, and repeatedly characterizes Angell's take as "her story" and "her telling".

Koplewicz presents a formulaic defense for psychopharmacology. He claims, "the drive for medication was fueled by the surprising observation that they were better treatments for mental illness than talk therapy or earlier sedative drugs." This assertion is precisely the point that Kirsch, Whitaker and Carlat had questioned. Are these treatments really better? Koplewicz reiterates the myth that of their efficacy without engaging, or even taking seriously, the possibility that they are not.

Regarding the DSM, Koplewicz rehashes the staid line that the DSM's real value is in "promoting reliable clinical communication.... nothing in the DSM... 'pushes' medication -- or any other form of treatment". His denial of the real power of the DSM and diagnoses, beyond its use as professional shorthand, antagonizes those who attempt to engage psychiatry in good faith. Even the psychiatrists who opposed the addition of TDD to the DSM-5 acknowledged, "how the pharmaceutical industry approaches the DSM." (Axelson et al, 2011).

Koplewicz makes a pragmatic argument that while more studies are needed, people are in need of help. While this position is laudable, his commitment to "objective evaluation" is confusing. On the one hand, he cedes that "objective research" has not caught up with "clinical realities", but he still has faith in pharmacology, even in its absence. On the other hand, "falling back on pure non-pharmacological treatment is not the better alternative, since these treatments have rarely undergone objective evaluation." Koplewicz writes off non-pharmacological treatments on the grounds that they have not been subjected to "objective evaluation", holding them to a stricter standard than he does to pharmacological treatments. Furthermore, he does not engage with the scientific evaluations that call into question the value of these pharmacological treatments, the basis for all three books that Angell reviews. Finally, regarding future risks Koplewicz writes: "As to the issue of psychoactive drugs actually harming patients by altering their brain chemistry over the long term, which Angell posits, here too data is lacking. It makes no sense to forego present benefit because of undemonstrated future harms." The potential harm of psychoactive drugs is very well demonstrated, so Koplewicz's defense rings hollow.

>We try to weigh the risks of psychoactive drug treatment against the risks of forgoing treatment. That risk often includes academic failure, dropping out of school, substance abuse and even suicide. Unfortunately, the risks of avoiding demonstrated useful treatments are not something critics, like Angell, consider.

Angell does not avoid considering the risks to troubled youth. Koplewicz avoids acknowledging the full-blown impact of a diagnosis on a child, the demonstrated health risks that psychoactive drugs pose, and categorically dismisses treatment approaches that cannot be objectively evaluated.

#Transcending Monocultures#

The volleys portrayed in this chapter, and others like it, continually antagonize mad activists and seed mistrust and disillusionment with the establishment. The evidence that children's behavior is differs dramatically from prior generations is inconclusive. It is entirely plausible that our adult standards and judgments have changed, not their behavior. However, if we really are witnessing a rise in childhood irritability and behavioral misconduct, there are many important research questions we need to be asking, and different people who need to be answering them. If the dramatic increase children's explosive outbursts are not illusory, we need to be looking for explanations beyond an individual's biology or brain chemistry. These outbursts may in fact be symptoms of society's ills, and it is essential to connect the dots between this epidemic in childhood mental illness and other pressing social issues like poverty, racism, educational reform and media consumption. These are questions that demand more study from social scientists, and psychiatry needs to collaborate directly with sociologists, anthropologists, and public health professionals. The field's isolation from the rest of academy leaves them deprived of essential perspectives on their work and its impact.

The proponents of pediatric bipolar often rely on rhetorical sleights of hand to bolster their case by strategically framing the terms of the debate. They conflate instrumentally derived facts with value judgments, and wield these facts in an attempt to short-circuit and shut down all debate. They cite laboratory evidence such as neurotransmitter activity, brain imaging, genetic markers, and heredity as proof that patients are "sick" when, at best, this evidence signifies difference and diversity. This diagnostic strategy is decidedly one-sided, as spokespeople for the prevailing medical model claim an objective view from nowhere, but their vantage point is loaded with subjective value judgments. Many are so thoroughly immersed in the disease paradigm that they don't even recognize the implicit subjectivity in these pronouncements. These flagrant distortions are most visible at the diagnostic boundaries, such as when moody toddlers and defiant adolescents are diagnosed as diseased.

All too often, purportedly neutral facts are loaded with value judgments, but presented as incontrovertible on the basis of their "facthood." This perspective does not deny the possibility of varying degrees of confidence in different assertions, but we must demand recognition of the inevitable entanglement of subjectivity in our descriptions of a complex and contingent world (Alcoff, 1991). The real-world implications of the misuse of language and rhetoric are serious and potent (Davis, 1997).

To avoid the deadlock of epistemological paralysis, psychiatry must break free from its monoculture and listen closely to language and voices of the people they are trying to help. Humility and a genuine respect for people's agency require that we take their stories and experiences seriously. These multiplicities of personal narratives demand reconceptualizations of mental health that defy the psychiatry's mainstream messaging. As the mantra of the disability rights movement powerfully insists: "Nothing about us without us." In recognition of the validity of this claim, we turn now to some of these stories, many of which include clear articulations of the earnest desire to be listened to and heard. Through these narratives, we hear these activists demanding legitimate recognition, which goes beyond the condescension of paternalistic attention.