\chapter{Occupy Mental Health: Liberty Park Madness}\label{chapter-three}

\cleanchapterquote{{\ldots}freedom, which only seldom---in times of crisis or revolution---becomes the direct aim of of political action, is actually the reason that men live together in political organizations at all. Without it, political life as such would be meaningless. The raison d'\^etre of politics is freedom, and its field of experience is action.}{Hannah Arendt}{Some Book} 

When Occupy Wall Street erupted in Zuccotti Park, mental health activists were determined to "occupy mental health," although initially there was little clarity around what this might mean. Many of those involved in mental health activism felt they had important knowledge and skills to contribute to the larger OWS movement. They wanted to talk with protesters and the media about the ways that psychiatry and big pharmaceutical companies contribute to social and economic injustice, and to emphasize the importance of tending to basic needs, such as eating and sleeping well, in order to avoid burning out. They especially want to explore how these two themes are related through the language we use to describe each other's behavior. Would the movement unravel as Occupiers alienated and pathologized each other through what activists call languages of oppression, or would they unite and support each other with languages of compassion?

The OWS movement generally scorned turning to the criminal justice system to resolve conflicts, but there was no such consensus when it came to dealing with emotional crises and behaviors. Around the country reports began to surface of protesters being forcibly hospitalized and medicated, and many on the ground were desperate for training and educational materials that offered alternative perspectives towards handling emotional trauma and navigating crises. Even among the most progressive circles of activists, few were equipped with tools for dealing with these crises beyond the mainstream DSM---the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual---and the pathologizing gaze of the psychiatric biomedical model.

More and more stories surfaced in the media and in activist circles about protester burnout and emotional crisis at the occupations. Given the exacerbating conditions---lack of sleep, poor nutrition, exposure to the elements, topped off with violence and police brutality---it is unsurprising there were many frayed edges amongst the protesters. Many of Zuccotti activists lacked local support systems since they had travelled to New York City, or were displaced, homeless or otherwise struggling with their basic needs. Stress and trauma precipitated a range of emotional reactions and differences in the protester's mental states became the subject of misunderstandings and conflicts. Many protesters also brought their own emotional baggage with them to Zuccotti, and the community struggled to integrate neurological and behavioral diversity.

In Fall 2011 I conducted three months of field-work around mental health issues and Occupy. On one of my first nights in Zuccotti Park I met a young woman from the Pacific Northwest who picking up trash around the camp and learned that she was part of the "Sanitation" working group. I was impressed by her commitment to support the protest through the humble backstage labor of keeping the camp clean. A great deal of the media coverage of OWS focused on the outward messages that the movement communicated to the external world, but during the time I spent around the protests I learned about all the activity devoted to sustaining the physical and emotional well-being of the camp and its inhabitants.

I began participating in some of the New York City working groups who were devoted to supporting the safety and welfare of the protesters. Many of the radical mental health activists I knew believed strongly that the people involved in these efforts would be very receptive to their language and ideas, and were an important constituency for cultivating alliances. Some of the volunteers in these working groups were already sympathetic with the radical mental health movement while others were relatively new to their message. I was genuinely surprised at the resistance that radical mental health activists encountered from some of the mental health professionals working with OWS. The disability rights mantra "Nothing about us without us" may seem like an innocuous proposition, but my fieldwork helped me understand its radical underpinnings and how difficult it can be to apply this maxim in practice. Ultimately, I witnessed how much easier it is for many to critique various 'isms' (capitalism, consumerism, neoliberalism) and the external world than it is to flip the mirror in order to critique yourself and your own profession.

Together with some of the members of the local New York City "Support" working group, radical mental health activists from around the country began assembling a collaborative guide for activists titled _Mindful Occupation: Rising up without Burning Out_. The book's concept excited radical mental health activists, as well as street medics and mental health professionals involved in OWS working groups. Some wanted to create materials to support teach-ins and workshops, and others found the work itself to be liberating and therapeutic. We also saw the publication as a device for provoking important conversations about community, peer-support and mutual aid.

Many heated debates emerged around our work on _Mindful Occupation_, as well as my direct participation in the local 'Support' group. It was through these deliberative processes and exchanges that I rediscovered the promise of Occupy's discursive "public space". These exchanges also revealed the ideological contours and boundaries of different constituencies. The anecdotes and controversies I highlight in this chapter help bring the new wave of psychiatric resistance into sharper focus by exposing the entrenched biases of the mental health establishment. These biases are so entrenched that they surfaced among some of the most liberal and progressive voices of the establishment---the mental health professionals involved in volunteering and protesting at Occupy Wall Street. The encounters also revealed some of the entrenched biases among the radical mental health activists, and forced them to confront pragmatic realities around mental health, substance abuse, and the community's capacity to provide the kind of the support they yearned for. Occupy Wall Street became a site where these opposing biases confronted each other face-to-face, where ideology met pragmatic necessity through the labor of on the ground support.

#owsmentalhealth: Emotional first aid#

While most of the media coverage around Occupy Wall Street emphasized the protestors' message to the external world, a significant amount of energy and attention at Zuccotti park was focused inwards, in the forms of capacity-building, skill-sharing, and maintaining the health and safety of the protestors (Gitlin, 2012; Graeber, 2013; Mushett, 2013). A complex network of working groups formed in anticipation and response to the perceived needs of the group. Working groups formed to address physical needs such as food, waste removal, housing, and park planning. Safety, security and health were also primary areas of concern, and many of the working groups involved in these efforts coordinated their work under the umbrella of the "safety cluster" and the Medic groups.

A west coast activist in his late twenties travelled to New York specifically to volunteer his emergency medicine skills to OWS, and joined the Medic group. He was familiar with The Icarus Project from his encounter with _Friends Make the Best Medicine_, a popular zine published by Icarus in 2007. He personally reached out to the New York City Icarus chapter, inviting them to participate in the Safety Cluster meetings. He was concerned about the tone and direction he had observed in some of the Safety Cluster meetings, and requested supporting materials and allies that could provide alternative perspectives. He did not communicate his specific concerns in detail, perhaps challenged to articulate his vague sense of unease without a richer language to express his critique---a language and perspective he hoped that Icarus activists would bring to the meetings.

The "Safety Cluster" was an assembly of working groups that included people committed to mediation, non-violent communication, security and deescalation, as well as people committed to anti-oppression and reducing sexual harassment, who formed the "Safer Spaces" working group. Additionally, there was a working group calling itself "Support" that was operating as a subgroup of the "Medic" working group. The Support group was comprised primarily of mental health professionals --- social workers, chaplains, psychiatrists, and a few non-traditional emotional support practitioners. Together, the safety cluster developed protocols for handling interpersonal conflicts in the park, and organized nightly "community watch" shifts, where members of the community organized to support protesters, and identify and defuse conflict. The Support group quickly assembled and distributed literature, where they described themselves as follows:

We're a group of people providing mental health and emotional support at Occupy Wall Street. Some of us have formal training and others of us have lived experience, including peers and regular folks who just know a thing or two about how to support themselves and each other when things feel rough. We are a subgroup of the Medical Working Group. (Supporter05, 2011a).

They identified these issues that protestors were facing:

>We're seeing issues like post-traumatic stress, depression, anxiety, altered states, anger, and other things that understandably can come up when you're sleeping outside and surrounded by police. Some might have issues related to drug or alcohol use, including staying sober while at the occupation. Folks are experiencing emotional distress related to social stigma/oppression, including people facing homelessness, LGBTQ people, people of color, people with disabilities and women, especially transgender women. (Supporter05, 2011a)

The support group quickly coordinated its efforts through a mailing list coupled with a Google Spreadsheet. They began organizing community patrols consisting of a pair of Support volunteers walking through the park for 3-hour shifts between 6pm and 3am. During these shifts the Support volunteers wore orange armbands fashioned with a red heart made of duct tape. Shifts began at the medical tent, where the Support team would check in with the medics and other Support volunteers. A red log book for recording serious and ongoing issues was kept in the medic tent. Only first names were recorded in this log book, and illegal behavior was not supposed to be recorded. The community patrol team was then encouraged to make the rounds within the camp and among the working group meeting areas, walking around and checking-in where appropriate.

Many encounters focused on assisting people with their basic needs, such as finding a blanket, helping them calm their anxiety, and offering support to people who were struggling, especially after a conflict with another protester or the police. Some of the protesters would seek out the Support volunteers to discuss emotional issues or social services. Others might come to the medical tent "looking for someone to deal with a perceived physical issue (ie, breathlessness, feeling cold, believing that they have a rash/bugs/etc.) but it turns out to be emotional (ie, panic attack, altered state/perception)." Support was also part of the team that was called into deal with crises that had a mental health component, such as altered states, delusions or self-harm.

The community patrols began operating soon after the occupation's establishment, on September 18th 2011, and ran all the way through the protesters' eviction on November 15th. For almost two full months the Support working group successfully organized pairs of volunteers to patrol Zuccotti park, nine hours a night, seven nights a week. Most of the volunteers had full-time jobs, and insuring the continuity of the patrols was a significant undertaking. Some of the volunteers signed up for a one patrol a week, but a few of the core participants in the Support working group did multiple patrols a week, in addition to regular organizer meetings and trainings. There were approximately 35-50 people participating in the community patrols. Since participation was fluid, and protesters within the Safety cluster often participated in more than one working group, it is difficult to determine the precise size of the Support group.

In addition to the community patrols, the Support working group convened weekly meetings, hosted trainings in order to orient volunteers on patrol procedures and Zuccotti security and deescalation protocols, and actively participated in many other working groups' meetings, including other groups in the safety cluster, the medic groups, and the general assembly. They also helped organize "Jail Support", where members of the Support group would meet arrested protesters upon their release. The support groups' mailing list was hosted on the Mayfirst.org's listserv, a long-time activist-friendly Internet Service Provider that provided free hosting to OWS working groups. The mailing list was very active throughout the occupation, providing a space for tactical as well as strategic planning.

From the outset the Support group struggled to negotiate a balance between theory and practice as practitioners from a diverse range of backgrounds came together for the purpose of supporting the overtly political OWS protest. As a part of a FAQ describing the group's identity and mission, the Support group organizers drafted the following statement:

Bring anti-oppression work into your practice: be aware of your own privileges (ie, race, class, having some place to sleep, or anything else) and how that may impact the people you are working with and their impression of who you are and what you're there to do. Some examples include: people of color have a long history of experiencing oppression from white social workers; people with mental health histories may have been traumatized by engagement with psych hospitals; or, LGBTQ people may have had their identities pathologized by mental health professionals. Practice cultural humility by checking your own identity-based assumptions. Seek to listen to people's experiences from a place of openness and non-judgment, and help people to meet their needs as they define them for themselves rather than your own idea of what might be best. Also, try to coordinate responding to any incidents related to racism, homophobia, transphobia, sexism, etc. with the Safer Spaces [working group]. (Supporter05, 2011b).

Unsurprisingly, this collective statement of group identity generated some controversy. Some within the group wanted to elaborate on the oppressive features of the mental health system, and work to avoid them:

>Supporter01: "I want to add one more thing: Work/be with the community in way that does not replicate, in any way, the oppressive models or behaviors of the system's social work/services. What do people think?" (2011a)

>Supporter02: "Oppressive models? I think too vague. One persons oppressive model may not be another persons oppressive model." (2011a)

>Supporter01: "I agree with you - it is too vague. Maybe we can give examples... For example, oppressive social work/services patterns: - collecting a lot of information from people, while worker doesn't share information about themselves;- use of professional language/jargon, such as diagnostic/DSM type of words, which may sound offensive or stigmatizing to people. Etc." (2011b)

>Supporter02: "I will yield to the group but personally I have done good and non oppressive work with that model in the right context. The key is ones own sensitivity, starting where the patient is, and knowing what to use when and how. Some people thrive with a non reciprocal opportunity to talk and are put off by a support person's self disclosure. Some find diagnoses and medicines a liberating relief. I think we should remain flexible on modalities with this work in progress." (2011b)

A recurring theme surfaced around the appropriateness of this forum for critiquing language and the system versus focusing on the day-to-day practice of supporting the protesters:

>Supporter03: "Let's not use this as the forum to critique our various disciplines but rather as a place to create something beautiful, with the hopes that our efforts will help to lead the systemic changes that are needed. I don't think this is the forum to debate diagnoses, disclosure etc. My understanding is that we are gathering to offer our unique experience and expertise to those who need our assistance. Let's focus on how we'll go about doing that and table these other challenges for the time being." (2011)

The question of critical engagement continued to surface, and some suggested spinning off a separate sub-group for more in-depth discussions:

>Supporter04: "In addition, I propose that people who are passionate about creating a more in depth discussion about who we are and deal with some of the more nuanced dilemmas we are facing, would create a sub-working group for that. Also, concerns have been raised about the way we conduct our meetings, therefore I propose that we get more familiar with decision making, common meeting rules, and consensus process, as one possible way in which we handle our meetings as well as conflict." (2011)

The pressure to support the protesters created an understandable tension between tactical problem-solving and carving out a discursive space for reflection and critique. However, the proposal to spin-off a sub-group for critical discussions was interpreted by some of the participants as a way to marginalize or even dismiss difficult and controversial perspectives. At the heart of this disagreement were differing perspectives on the nature and goals of the OWS protest, layered on top of long-time controversies around the effectiveness of mainstream models of support. Some saw OWS as a platform for protesting inequality and the socio-economic system. Others took a more expansive view, and expressed their protest by prefiguratively modeling and enacting the kind of society they wished to inhabit. The Support group was caught in the middle, as many of the participants in the group were attempting to support the protesters using instruments and tools that were also implicated in perpetuating the inequalities that constituted OWS's core concerns. Many in the group were acutely aware that certain support models could replicate the same power relations that OWS was resisting.

#Joie de Vivre#

In the early morning on Saturday, October 22nd Dylan Spoelstra, a 24 year-old Canadian OWS protester, scaled Zuccotti Park's "Joie de Vivre", a 70-foot tall, bright red sculpture composed of "open-ended tetrahedrons". Dylan remained on the sculpture for several hours until the police talked him down, handcuffed him, and sent him to Bellevue for a psychiatric evaluation (Baker, 2011). Dylan climbed the statue early in the morning and remained perched on a platform 30 feet above the ground for several hours. He demanded Mayor Bloomberg's resignation, and repeatedly requested a jacket and cigarettes throughout his dialogues with the Police Department's hostage negotiation unit. According to the police, "[h]e was not arrested, he did not get a summons, he'll just be evaluated psychologically." Dylan was subsequently committed to Bellevue's psychiatric unit, where he spent over 2 weeks as a psychiatric inpatient.

This incident sent waves through the support group, since this was precisely the kind of situation they wanted to intervene, and handle with more gentleness and compassion than the NYPD. Supporter02 wrote:

>Dear OWS support, I was at Zuccotti Park on Thursday at 6:30 pm for the first time and in my first five minutes had met the young man who climbed the sculpture on Saturday morning. Before he ran off, It was clear to me as I spoke with him that he was extremely psychotic, manic, and suffering and it was also clear to me that he could likely be helped in a relatively short period of time in a way that would not have involved danger, handcuffs, and press. By the time I left at 11:30, I was too troubled by my experience with Support to return. I felt that the current structure was unsafe for volunteers and occupiers and I could not ethically participate in it as Support; nor could I engage in the time consuming process of organizing, when my goal had been to come in and do what I know how to do, which is to help people like Dylan. (2011c)

It is unclear precisely what treatment alternatives Supporter02 had in mind, or why s/he felt thwarted by the group's consensus process. Supporter02 is an experienced social worker who ran a small social work clinic in the Manhattan. When the support group first formed, Supporter02 offered to bring a psychiatric colleague to the park, and was one of the stronger proponents of the value of the diagnoses and psychiatric medication. S/he also made a case for supporters not disclosing their own personal history to supportees, since in his/her clinical experience some patients preferred to work with counselors operating with detached authority. Though Supporter02 minces his/her words in this email exchange, his/her frustration with the Support group's consensus model is clear.

We are left guessing at his/her's preferred alternative, but given Supporter02's other statements, it is likely that he/she would have steered Dylan to psychiatric support, and attempted to avoid police involvement at all costs. Afterwards, some of the mental health activists in the park that night discussed how they would have preferred to support Dylan by being together with him through his crisis, providing one-on-one, direct support. The conceded that they lacked the capacity to follow through on such an intensive support obligation. Ultimately, there is no clear-cut, correct answer to volatile situations such as Dylan's. While it is easy to second-guess the past, these situations are often chaotic and unpredictable. It is only after they have deteriorated that their impact and potential danger becomes clear. For every Dylan, there were many activists in Zuccotti acting erratically whose behavior never escalated to the point inviting police intervention. While everyone in the Support group was against police involvement, attitudes around coercion and forced hospitalization varied widely.

Supporter02 continued to vent her frustration with other participants in the Support working group:

>I had entered the Occupation with humility and a wish to be of service and now I am suggesting that there should be greater humility on the part of all involved with Support. The expertise and years of experience of professionals who have worked on the ground IN NEW YORK CITY with the homeless, the mentally ill, with addiction, with gangs, with domestic violence, with the hospital and entitlement systems, needs to be sought out actively and immediately. They are there for the asking. Respect specialization. I would not and could not presume to do anything outside of my ken. There is no time to argue about language or politics on the south side of the Park. Those debates can come later. Assume that anyone offering their service to the Occupation is like minded enough and ask them what they know and how best to proceed. It would be better to err on the side of that deference when addressing issues of immediate health and safety, and not with guiding the course of the movement." (2011c)

While Supporter02 would have most likely arranged a more compassionate intervention for Dylan than he received at the hands of the NYPD, the way s/he asserted his/her authority was triggering to some of the participants in the group. Supporter02 is clear enough in his/her writing to antagonize some, but did not persuade others to adopt his/her suggestions. It is unclear if the vagueness in Supporter02's writing is a function of his/her's frustration, lack of time, or if it was supplemented by face-to-face encounters. Supporter02 may have also constrained some of his/her language out of deference or fear of reprisal by the more radical contingents on the list.

Supporter02's claim that "There is no time to argue about language or politics on the south side of the Park. Those debates can come later." was met by the reaction that "arguing about language and politics is /exactly/ what we are in the Park to do." Supporter02's insistence that the participants "respect specialization" provoked the response that "'specialists' [should] pay reciprocal respect to the experiences of those that they treat. We are all specialists in our own personal experiences, and these experiences need to be respected and validated by those who are trying to help - even if they are acting in good faith, and have the best of intentions." The tensions between the authority of credentialed expertise and experiential expertise were never resolved, and recurred throughout the duration of the occupation.

These sentiments were mirrored in face-to-face group meetings, leading to frustration and exacerbation. Some meetings ran so long that there was no time to complete the scheduled agenda, and participants that who had waited patiently for over two hours to speak were never given the floor. On the other hand, face-to-face encounters sometimes led to reconciliation, especially in sidebars and personal conversations outside the formal meeting space where participants developed friendships and trust. Supporter05, shouldered an immense amount of responsibility, including organizing shifts, patrolling the park for multiple shifts per week, and facilitating trainings and meetings. His/her superb facilitation skills, dynamic inclusiveness and firm demeanor helped hold the meetings together, but eventually the stress of mediating conflicts became unbearable and Supporter05 suffered extreme burn out, choosing to step back from his/her core organizing role. Supporter05's stepping back closely followed the police raid on Zuccotti, and had the occupation continued, it is unlikely the group had the capacity to sustain the level of services it was providing in the park through the winter.

#Is there a doctor in the house?#

On a crisp autumn evening in early October, I attended an in-person Support-group meeting where a psychiatrist volunteering with the Support group introduced a motion to recruit more psychiatrists to spend time in the park and support the protester's psychiatric needs. The medic who had invited Icarus to OWS was present, in his wide-brimmed hat, along with two young social work students from Hunter College who had signed up for a community patrol that night, and other members of the Support group. The group was sharply divided on this action. Some argued against this recruitment, likening it to recruiting off-duty police officers to assist with security in the camp. They were visibly agitated, and angrily pointed out that psychiatrists have state sanctioned power to forcibly medicate or even institutionalize citizens against their will, and introducing this power dynamic to the community patrols would likely undermine trust. Others rationally countered that some of the protesters were taking already taking psychiatric medications, and would best be supported by not letting their prescriptions lapse. Also, there were some situations developing in Zuccotti that might benefit from psychiatric treatment, including anxiety, depression, panics, insomnia, and substance abuse. Although their points were largely rational, their tone was interpreted as patronizing and condescending.

Strikingly, during this exchange, the psychiatrist present was belligerent and aggressive, dismissing the emotional significance of language and labels, while casually directing accusatory clinical diagnoses at other group members as well as activists. He did not yell, but spoke loudly, gesticulated wildly, and at one point, stood up and physically intimidated someone who disagreed with him. He exhibited an arrogance and lack of reflective awareness that disturbed many in the group, and demonstrated the very behaviors and attitudes that those against recruiting more psychiatrists were concerned about. This attitudinal pattern is common among physicians, especially psychiatrists, as we have already seen in Chapter 2. These outbursts illustrate the need for medicine to adopt what Sayantani DasGupta calls "narrative humility", which she contrasts with medical curriculum's claims of "cultural competence" (DasGupta, 2008). She sharply argues that culture is not something you can "master" in a two-week workshop, and this psychiatrist's display of arrogant overconfidence was disconcerting and undermined trust. The group never succeeded in recruiting other psychiatrists to the park, and physicians associated with the Medical group operated an underground pharmacy, filling psychiatric prescriptions for the protesters.

The Support group acknowledged that they did not all share a common language, although they thought they largely agreed on their mission and goals. The group leadership encouraged the membership to be patient with each other, and give each other the benefit of the doubt.

>Supporter05: And, one thing I'm encountering at many different meetings is that this really is the 99%. We're not all radical, and we're not all radical about everything. We don't all know or agree with the most politically correct or empowering or cutting edge way to talk about things. \*We also cannot demand that all of those approaches change overnight as a precondition to being able to work together.\* Meeting people where they're at doesn't just apply to others, it applies to us. This goes for the radical mental health folks but it also goes for the social workers: the radical mental health movement has been working very hard to change the language and culture of how we talk about these issues for a long time. It can be hard to be in a progressive space and hear some terminology that feels contrary to that. (2011c)

The cold, clinical language of psychiatry continued to trigger some of the radical mental health activists, and some members of the "Support" team made an effort to adjust their language after they began to understand its impact and what some alternatives. Others however, insisted that this language was merely a value-neutral shorthand, jargon for professionals to communicate with each other more efficiently. While the debate about the impact of clinical labels on people's identity has surfaced in numerous other contexts (Davis, 1997; Butler, 2004), the way it surfaced at Occupy Wall Street indicates how much work the mental health activists have ahead of them.

#Involuntary treatment#

Conversations on the list also returned regularly to the topic of involuntary hospitalization. Supporter07, a chaplain who was working closely with the support group, first emphasized their deference to mental health professionals:

Chaplains although get training in mental health first aid, trauma, counseling and are taught to identify mental disorders and diseases etc. but certainly not treat them it is extremely important in our work as chaplains to call in the licensed professionals to handle as we are not qualified to do so. I do not claim nor am a mental health professional. Partnering with them or MDs, psych classes and my own personal Jungian analysis sessions of the past neither makes me so. (2011).

S/he proceeded to explain his/her understanding of the relationship between the OWS Support group and the NY State mental health policy, as well as his/her understanding of patient rights.

>Having said that the logical part of me does feel that although we are really trying to do the right thing by being on the side of patient advocacy & it is vital that we understand that are not an island devoid of state laws and mental and medical health policy and procedures in New York state. From what I do understand of the laws is that if an MD, PsyD or MSW suggests that a person be admitted to a facility and volunteers they are only in that said facility for a 3 day observation. They are not institutionally "locked" up indefinitely... there is a entire legal process involved to do that involving state legal agencies and it is limited to the criminals.... Although no law or policy is absolutely perfect, to prevent serious risk and/or possible loss, I do think it would be in our best interests to abide by the experience of the seasoned social workers, clinical psychologists and psychiatrists who are well versed in these systems and procedures. I humbly suggest that we set aside any preconceived notion or experience of "the system" to gain benefit from their work. Their experience in their field is vital to the movement. Perhaps what the situation calls for is not to toss the baby out with the bath water but rather to take what already exists and build upon it with out dismissing that which already does work? In other words, shall we work to improve it not abolish it all together? (2011)

Their textbook view of what actually transpires in cases of involuntary hospitalization was vehemently challenged by Supporter08:

>Mental health professionals have been granted state-sanctioned power to forcibly detain (and toxically medicate!) citizens without any due process or legal recourse. 72 hour observation? Bullshit. Depends if you are voluntary or involuntary, and all it takes for someone to lose their constitutional freedoms is one psychiatrist with a wink to another.

>Threat to yourself or to others? Maybe that's how people are admitted, but they won't be discharged until their behavior conforms to the norms as defined by their wardens. Or until their insurance runs out. Whichever comes last.

>How bad can a few days or weeks or months in a psych ward be? Worse than jail? For some. Inpatient hospitalization often inflicts physical and emotional abuse upon patients, with scars, and medical bills, that can last a lifetime. Once hospitalized, many patients are sucked into a revolving door of psychiatric care as their personalities are examined and pathologized under the gaze of the psychiatric magnifying glass. I know /many/ who would prefer to take their chances with the criminal justice system than ever set foot inside of a psychiatric ward again.

>So, let's have a conversation about patient realities, from the subjective experiences of patients, rather than patient rights. Let's respect each others experiences and knowledge, and not ask for license numbers and credentials in order to be admitted to the conversation. (2011)

These claims were corroborated by a social worker with experience working in in-patient facilities:

>Supporter09: i write here to give [Supporter08] support that no matter what the law states, the 72 hour observation period is not part of actual reality, certainly not in the hospitals i've worked in. first of all, patients---even voluntary ones---have to assertively write a 72-hour letter, which then starts the clock, and often the treatment team will indicate it may contest the letter in weekly court unless blah blah, so if the patient wants to hold their own completely they may have to wait until court, possibly seven days after being admitted, for instance.

>Supporter08, i hear your frustration. i think a lot of us are frustrated---for a variety of reasons, or maybe a bunch of similar ones---and feeling belittled (no credentials? no patient experience? no street cred?) really sucks, especially when we're all working so hard and putting so much of our heart into this. i guess all this arguing, or dialoguing, or whatever, probably has to happen at some level because this movement does represent a fundamental shift in practically everything. (2011)

These encounters demonstrated the value of bringing together people from different backgrounds, including those with direct experiences within the psychiatric system. Although concessions and compromises were rarely made in writing, numerous participants in the Support group approached me offline to express the value they found in these exchanges. Although the primary interlocutors rarely gave much ground, many of the lurkers and listeners on the list reported that they learned a great deal about this new wave of radical mental health, and how it differed from the dogmatic straw-man of anti-psychiatry they were familiar with previously. While it is difficult to tell if the presence and participation of the radical mental health activists within this group had a significant impact on its operations, it is clear from the mailing list that they succeeded in problematizing many assumptions that the professionals took for granted.

#License to Support#

Cracks continued to emerge, along with tensions between the professionals and the peer-supporters. At one point, one of the Support group members strongly proposed that Support members wear armbands displaying their credentials and professional license number:

>Supporter06: "I've been talking with the medical people about a little more elaborate identification system. They have talked to me about problems they've been having with a fringe group 'Icarus' who have been acting at cross purposes with medical when trying to deal with psychotic/dangerous people in the park. According to the medics this group has been "encouraging" crazy behavior... mental health [should have] its own insignia on a sticker and/or big t-shirt that can be worn over outer clothing that identifies the person as an ows/zuccotti park mental health worker and has a number that can be written in. There can be a numbering system such as Sw# (for social workers), Pc# (for pastoral counselors), Psy# (for psychiatrists) The number is key because it means the person has had some \*vetting and orientation\*

>All mental health workers can be vetted (ie. Their credentials checked\*) and be oriented to work in the park. Once this is done they can be given a number to write-in on their t-shirt or sticker. \*All workers in the park who see mental health workers with no number should refer them to a mental health point person for vetting and orientation\*. orientation including such things as - Procedure for dealing with psychotic/and or dangerous people in the park - Procedure for signing in and out - where the referral lists are and familiarity with what's on them. - a basic knowledge of the park and neighborhood service. - some idea on the limits of what we can provide vs. refer out. - How to proceed in a dangerous situation." (2011a)

The particular incident that spurred Supporter06 to recommend vetting the Support team was never fully elaborated or substantiated. There were over a dozen activists associated with The Icarus Project who were organizing in Zuccotti, participating in a range of working groups, including the Support group this email was addressed to. Supporter06's description of the "fringe" group Icarus suggests that s/he was unaware there were Icarus Project members participating in the group, or, was intentionally antagonizing them. As we will see in more detail in Chapter 5, The Icarus Project is a loosely structured network without a formal, hierarchical leadership structure. It is unclear if there were any individuals who identified themselves with The Icarus Project who the medics confused with a "group", but there was almost certainly no organized action by The Icarus Project to disrupt the medical tent.

In follow up conversations with the Medical group they explained that they wanted to fully "clear" their patients medically (e.g. physically) before turning them over to the Support group for emotional support. One radical mental health activist countered that in an era dominated by the reductionist biomedical model, all forms emotional distress could be described in medical terms, ceding all authority to the Medical group when it comes to emotional well being. Was a chemical imbalance a physical condition, to be treated under the jurisdiction of the Medics? What is the line between psychical and emotional ailments?

Soon after this exchange I got together for dinner and a drink at a nearby Irish pub with the head of the medical tent, a professional nurse who had shouldered the incredible responsibility of managing the life and death operations of the Medic group. His bandana-wearing golden retriever accompanied him, and he relayed his own personal traumatic experiences with psychiatry, and his overmedication on attention deficit disorder drugs as a teenager. In the course of our conversation it became clear that his impression of all psychiatric resistance conformed to the traditional mold of 1970s anti-psychiatry. His understanding of the radical mental activists was that they were categorically against all psychiatric medications, and did not believe that mental illness existed. He was unsure of which situation Supporter06 was referring to, but was very concerned that the entire medical operation would be held liable, and potentially shut down if it violated NY State standards around psychiatric evaluation and care. He saw the role of the Medic group as supporting OWS within the framework of the existing system, rather than re-imagining all social, medical and psychiatric services. Our conversation left him with a newfound appreciation for the more nuanced critique offered by the new wave of mental health activists, and he agreed to reconsider his extreme stance of wanting to bring in psychiatric authorities when faced with emotionally disturbed patients.

The issue of "vetting and orientation" continued to divide the group. Supporter10 responded to the armband proposal by questioning the underlying biases of the credentialing systems, as well as considering who would be excluded if this standard were enforced:

>In regard to the "vetting and orientation" and the classification of who is qualified to provide what "support" services - this concerns me. I get how we want to have some idea of who is representing "support." I just hope that this doesn't turn into something that is based on "formal expertise" as opposed to informal, because the systems that formally recognize and confer expertise (i.e. licensing bodies, grad schools, etc.) are all inherently racist, classist, and other forms of oppressive. Given that these oppressions are at the root of a lot of the conflicts in the park, I want this group to consciously and purposefully recognize and include informal expertise at providing "support." I know if we went to a system of only recognizing licensed/credentialed experts as being qualified to provide support, that would exclude most of the support volunteers who have experience with issues of homelessness, drug use, radical mental health, and harm reduction (myself included). (2011a)

Supporter06 replied:

>I agree with your larger point that one doesn't need to be credentialed to provide support, However, the problem I have is with people with no mental-heath or medical training setting policy regarding what to do and how to handle people in a psychotic, manic or dangerous episode.

>Even thought Zuccotti park is a somewhat removed microcosm with its own ideals and mores, and they are trying to do things differently in regards to various 'isms' (not too successfully I might add) this does not strike me as a set of qualifications that then makes one able to determine 'best practice' on what to do and how to proceed with someone who is in a state of being a danger to themselves or those around them. Nor does having had an experience of being admitted to a psychiatric ward, or having a friend or relative admitted no matter how unpleasant the experience was. The whole situation of 'support' proceeding along these lines and making up new guidelines in these situations strikes me as dangerous and irresponsible. (2011b)

It is unclear what kind of training Supporter06 had in mind that would not provide credentials, but throughout the exchange s/he refused to demonstrate sensitivity to stigma and labeling, and insisted on dismissing the lived experiences and advice of people who had extensive experiences with the system. In the end, the group never adopted the resolution to wear armbands with identifying professional credentials, although some of the individuals in the group did so on their own.

#Which 99%?#

The questioning of credentials on the Support team was mirrored with a parallel questioning of the credentials of some of the protesters. OWS began as an inclusive movement with the intent of including all who wanted to participate. This principle became challenging to uphold as disruptions swept through the park, especially after the police began directing the homeless and substance abusers to Zuccotti. The Zuccotti Peace council tried to establish a protocol for asking people to leave the park, but the police maintained that, just as the police could not force the protesters to leave the park, OWS could not force anyone to leave either. Supporter02 describes another incident involving a couple who were well known to the Support group, and had been previously asked to leave the park after an incident where they had hit each other:

>Note that on Monday night, both the methadone addict couple and the drunken punk rocker men railed endlessly amidst their noise and threats and chaos about how they were there for the movement and the cause, had been there since day two for that reason, and were not like these other self-entitled freeloaders all around them causing trouble. The language of this distinction is clearly part of the park culture and sadly, something the disease of addiction will readily try to co-opt. (2011d)

Supporter10 responded passionately:

>I don't see how we can know that these claims were co-optation or insincere. Personally if someone told me that my political motivations were invalidated by my substance use, I would experience that as highly condescending and alienating and it wouldn't endear me to them. The fact that people use substances does not take away all of their agency or maturity or opinions. To be sure, it also doesn't excuse threatening or aggressive behavior. I'm really interested in changing the park culture that includes this language of distinction, rather than holding it precious and deciding who is qualified to make that distinction.

>Again, just speaking for myself, but the revolution that I'm interested in participating in is the one that includes everybody and doesn't distinguish between worthy and unworthy protesters. Personally I feel that engaging and including everyone IS affecting systems of change. Some of the work that I'm doing with homeless/young/drug-using/gang-involved/etc. occupiers is exactly that. Talking to them about why they're there. And I don't mean challenging them, I mean listening to them...

>Also, many people experience "addict" as a pretty stigmatizing label, especially when applied externally by someone else. Personally I don't use it unless the person I'm speaking with has self-identified that way. (2011a)

The issue of who was a legitimate protester, like the issue of who was a legitimate Supporter, was contentious and fraught. These issues provoked difficult questions about the identity and mission of the movement, and it is not surprising that within the Support group there were differing opinions around the value of inclusivity. Some felt strongly that the movement needed to accomplish specific political objectives, and that the protesters' activities should be organized according to these objectives. Others felt strongly that the work of creating an alternative society within the encampment was inherently political, and should not only be viewed instrumentally, as a means to an end. Rather, the creation of this alternative society was an end in itself, as well as a powerful performative expression of the group's principles. A policy of radical inclusion, even where it created some discomfort, was a strong political statement that defied the status quo, embodied the values the movement sought to advance, and was one way to effect change. The Support group often found itself in the crossfire of this conflict, mediating volatile conflicts and attempting to diffuse tensions before they erupted.

#Vibe checkers and knife wielding psychotics#

Although the threat of violence and sexual harassment in the park was real and immanent, some of the Support group participants began to questions the group's incessant focus on violence in their orientations and role-plays. They argued that the constant focus in role-plays on scenarios like a confrontation with a "knife wielding psychotic" primed the community patrollers, and helped perpetuate an atmosphere of fear, control and anger among the support staff. The mailing list was filled with examples of people imagining and responding to negative situations, but the Support group was not focused on improving this atmosphere by introducing positive energy to the park. These black and white examples also obscured the complexities of the far more common grey zones, like eccentric and annoying behaviors.

Countercultural events such as Rainbow Gatherings, Grateful Dead shows, and Burning Man feature "vibe checkers", or people responsible for helping to insure that nobody is having a "bad trip". Some of the radical mental health activists argued that the Support group's community patrols felt more like policing than vibe checkers. In recent years, there have been numerous incidents where law enforcement has overacted when confronting mentally ill suspects, often with fatal outcomes (Krameddine & Silverstone, 2015; Friedersdorf, 2015). The Support group's tactics were incomparable to law enforcement's, as the community patrols were unarmed, empathetic, and focused on verbal de-escalation. Nonetheless, the some of the group's trainings and role play scenarios emotionally triggered some Supporters who had been on the receiving end of these kinds of authoritative interventions in their past. They expressed their desire for more nuanced role-play scenarios, and felt the black and white portrayals reduced their experiences to caricatures, and fostered exaggerated responses.

Being surveilled by the community patrols, a group that had begun to wield a distinct power within the community encampment, was a responsibility that most of the Support group lived up to. However, as conditions in Zuccotti continued to deteriorate as the weather became colder and people set up tents, the patrols became more vigilant. The tents meant more private space, and more opportunities for mischief and strife to flourish. Some of the patrols carried their stress with them, and in some circumstances may have helped reinforce an atmosphere of fear and anxiety.

>Supporter10: "In terms of the incident last night with the young man with the broken leg. I'm pretty sure that I've witnessed the disagreements and conflicts that lead up to that situation.... [T]his stems from some bigger issues than just that someone is "mentally ill" or "aggressive" or violent. I'm not trying to excuse or justify violence. I know these young people really well and I absolutely want nothing more than for them to be able to be safe.... [A] lot of the violence that is happening in the park is not random or isolated or happening in a vacuum. To adequately address and prevent it, we're going to need responses and interventions that take a lot of systemic injustice and inequality into account. I'm not saying I have the answer, or that there even is an answer that can be written up in a 5-step guide and distributed to different working groups. I'm just saying that these are big issues, that go much beyond a mental health diagnosis or whether or not someone is using substances. (2011b)

The incident that Supporter10 reports in this email, sent on November 14, the night before the police raid on Zuccotti park, captures the kinds of issues that Support grappled with in the latter days of the encampment. By this time, fatigue had set in, and the communication lines between Support members were fragmented. This incident Supporter10 writes about was not captured in the red log book, which was never consistently used, and the full background of this story was passed orally between Supporters directly involved in the intervention. Supporters who were not on-site that day relied on the mailing list for background information, and only received an incomplete account of the situation. Mailing list communications were often cryptic, in part because of the effort required to compose a complete story, and in part since participants did not completely trust everyone else on the list.

I am unfamiliar with the full backstory behind this particular email, but I believe that it likely conveys a potent subtext, a communication sent to the wider list that was really intended for one or two specific individuals, the continuation of a conversation that began in person. Supporter10 was a social work student, studying community organizing, mediation, and de-escalation. His/her attempt to inject a consideration of the activist's history into their evaluation, and refutation of the group's ability to capture this approach in bullet points may have been a response to harsher proposals to eject the "troublemaker" from the park, and a critique of the effort to simplify the principles of mediation to a one-page flyer.

Faced with this range of differing and irreconcilable perspectives, a few members of the Support group migrated to other groups that better matched their understanding of support, and the kinds of assistance they wanted to offer the movement. They shared with me how they felt marginalized within the Support group structure, systematically silenced and ignored during meetings, and wanted to participate in a group more aligned with their values. Despite all of these conflicts and critiques, the Support group performed remarkably well, providing essential support services throughout the occupation of Zuccotti park, and extending their services through the winter as Occupy was dispersed throughout the city into makeshift shelters. Some of the differences people expressed with the Support group were based more on personality and style, than on substantive ideological differences.

One of Occupy's strengths was catalyzing encounters between diverse perspectives, in relative safety. I want to emphasize that with all of the disagreements, the members of the Support group were all dedicated and passionate activists with good hearts and the best of intensions. Some of the demands of the Radical Mental Health activists were overly unreasonable, impractical, and disconnected from the harsh realities of suffering and risk on the ground. Overall the Support group was effective and cohesive, sustaining an active presence in the park throughout the period of occupied encampment. Radical mental health activists would most likely welcome the mainstream adoption of the intervention models developed and practiced by the Occupy Support group. Within the context of Occupy, the radical mental health activists held the Support group to a higher standard, in an effort to advance the discourse by challenging assumptions, unsettling conventions and provoking debate.

#Coda: Post-Zuccotti shelter and support#

Following the NYPD's violent eviction from Zuccotti park at 1am on November 15th, a few homeless shelters and churches opened their doors to the protesters. Many Zuccotti occupiers had come from out of town to the protests and needed shelter during New York's cold winter months. The Support group was pivotal in negotiating these arrangements, and pivotal in helping sustain these shelters in the months that followed. Conflicts between shelter dwellers and between the protesters and the shelter providers were more complex and difficult to manage than in the park. The Support group reverted to a more traditional model of support, as the shelter arrangement closely resembled typical settings where social worker normally practiced. The group worked to provide information about government services, helped people secure food, clothing, and healthcare, and mediated conflicts with the shelter providers. The shelter organizers struggled to keep the peace, and many of the shelters formed their own governing structures. A few of the shelter organizers specifically asked the Support group to step back, as they felt that the Support members were more harmful than helpful. Overall, once the role of the Support group shifted to offering more traditional forms of Social Work support, the conversations around alternative mental health largely faded. While there was still plenty of urgency around engaging and questioning mainstream paradigms of mental health diagnosis and treatment, the occupation at Zuccotti helped foster the unique conditions for discussing these issues, in situ.

#Mindful Occupation: Rising up without burning out#

Alongside my participation in the OWS Support group, I was simultaneously involved in a complementary project aimed at compiling, remixing and authoring materials aimed to support protesters and caregivers struggling with emotional crisis within the context of Occupy. The idea of working on this book excited radical mental health activists from around the country, as well as street medics and mental health professionals involved in Occupy working groups. Some wanted to create materials to support teach-ins and workshops, and others found the work itself to be liberating, defiant, and therapeutic. We also saw the publication as a device for provoking important conversations about community, peer-support and mutual aid.

I trace this project's inception to a number of other projects I had recently worked on which anticipated this publication. First, the summer preceding OWS I consulted with The Icarus Project on re-releasing new editions of their existing catalog of self-published books. We were trying to reimagine zine distribution for the 21st century through on-demand publishing and the release of the "source" files behind their publications to enable remixing and repurposing. Although the Icarus publications were already available under Creative Commons licensing, only the derivative, print-ready PDFs were distributed and not the underlying assets and layout files. The original source files were authored using Adobe's Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign applications, and were then rendered to the publishable PDFs. Reworking the PDFs is very difficult without these original source files, and this meant that remixing the materials for other purposes was legally permissible, but practically difficult. Second, I had also recently worked with the booki platform (later renamed BookType), an open-source wiki that is designed to create print-ready PDFs, as well as ebooks in a range of digital formats (Sourcefabric, n.d.). I was aware that this tool had been used to support "book sprints," in which teams would author a book in as little as a week. I myself had remotely contributed a chapter to _Collaborative Futures,_ a book whose first edition was authored by five collaborators who locked themselves in a hotel room starting with nothing but the title, and emerged a week later with a complete first draft(Zer-Aviv et al., 2010). The _Mindful Occupation_ project took longer than a week to assemble, but the inspiration came directly from prior booki projects, such as _Collaborative Futures_ and _How to Bypass Internet Censorship_ (FLOSS Manual Contributors, 2014). Finally, a friend of mine involved in OWS had recently launched a Kickstarter campaign for the creation and publication of _The 99%'s Guide,_ and I was inspired by this project to attempt something similar around mental health and Occupy (Mushett, Shah & Tang, 2011).

All of the labor on this project was completely voluntary, from the cover art, to the layout, to the mindfuloccupation.org website and the fundraising video. We also made extensive use of prior materials that had been released under Creative Commons licenses. Since print remains an important medium of distribution and dissemination, we set up a Kickstarter project to help fund our print run and raised over $3,000. We released a draft version of the hard copy in time for May Day 2012 and the May 5 occupation of the American Psychiatric Association conference in Philadelphia that I write about in the next chapter. The book was picked up for distribution by AK Press, an anarchist-friendly publisher and distributor, and to date has sold hundreds of copies.

The book brings together materials on emotional first aid, navigating crises, preventing and healing sexual assault, as well as facilitating peer-support groups and coping with stress. Many of the preexisting materials needed to be re-contextualized. For example, we would find a great resource within a PDF alongside material less relevant to Occupy. We did a lot of re-mixing and matching. When revisiting some older materials, we also found that some of it had aged poorly, and we reworked these portions with revised sensibilities. We also authored a great deal of original content, including the introduction, sections explaining radical mental health, and an effort to connect corruption in psychiatry and pharma directly to the core concerns of Occupy. We intended these sections to stimulate more discussion, analysis and action.

#Cacophonous choruses: One book, many voices#

By design, we selected a wiki-like platform to assemble and author the book. Anyone involved in the project could add or edit material online, and the system preserved the history of all our edits. We also set up a mailing list alongside the booki platform for planning logistics, developing content, and working through conflicts. The project attracted a diverse range of participants from a variety of backgrounds, all listed in the credits of the publication and on the website (Imai et al., 2012, p. 77). The project mailing list included over 40 contributors, the Kickstarter project attracted close to 80 supporters, and dozens of others contributed their skills, talent, and time to help produce this publication. Participants included mental health professionals, some of whom were involved with the Support group, long-time radical mental health activists, graduate students, and occupiers interested in mental health.

The project attracted contributors with varying perspectives and agendas. One of the key contributors, Contributor01, was a social worker and long time Icarus organizer. On October 12th, he composed the following announcement, and circulated it within relevant communities:

>The idea has come up to group-author a book/zine about mental health in direct action/protest situations that can be quickly compiled, printed and distributed at the occupy events around the country.... If you want, please join in the authoring or reach out to others you know who might be able to help out, if you don't have time/energy to write anything, please please at least send on any topics/questions/concerns you hope could be addressed.

We quickly assembled a working title, _Mental Health and Activism: A guide to protesting sanely in a world gone mad_ (later renamed _Mindful Occupation: Rising up without burning out_)_,_ and a tentative outline, including possible chapters such as: "1) _What is radical mental health?_ Overview of radical mental health, critique of psychiatry, brief history of critical movements, why important; 2) _Rising up without burning out_ self care, harm reduction, care for others, etc); 3) _Psychological First Aid for everyone_ maybe separate chapter geared towards medics specifically?; 4) _Mental and Emotional Health at an Action Clinic_ how to get providers on board, things to think about, supplies needed, etc; 5) _Just because you're paranoid doesn't mean they aren't out to get you_ Special notes about dealing with mental health and the police state including how to care for people in jail, coming out of jail, how to keep paranoia in check, queer and trans legal support issues, etc,; 6) _Appendixes_; 7) _Materials List_; 8) _Resource List_; 9) _Books_/_Websites to Read"._ This outline set the tone and direction for the project, and provided people interested in contributing with a clearer sense of the project's intent.

In addition to the tentative outline, Contributor01 also posed some guiding questions they thought we should grapple with:

>Some open questions: Someone is talking about killing themselves at the encampment, what do I do? (already happened in Mpls, and a probable suicide in San Diego) Someone is freaking out, what do I do? (Or why you shouldn't call the cops to deal with someone who is freaking out.) Dealing with trauma during/after an action or police brutality Having a self-care plan - also the movement doesn't need any heroes or martyrs Having some people with discreet access to marijuana and/or benzos to deal with extreme panic (good idea or bad idea) - general concerns about having RX drugs around in an action clinic, etc.

Initially, the group hoped to rapidly assemble relevant materials for publication, and quickly raise funds to print and distribute them where they were most needed. We quickly identified some great existing resources, such as the Activist Trauma Support site (Activist Trauma Support, n.d.) and Will Hall's First Aid for Emotional Trauma (2008), and obtained permission from the authors to republish their material. The author of a recent zine entitled _Stress, Anger, Depression, Anxiety: a Coping Skills Zine_ also joined the effort (Contributor08), and offered access to all of his/her material. Some of the working groups in the safety cluster created handouts with important information and guidance, such as the "Safer Spaces Training Document" and these were incorporated as well.

As the project's scope and ambition grew, the hope for a quick turnaround was quickly dispelled. Although we repurposed large portions of content, we also committed to authoring some original content, aimed to contextualize the more generic support materials within the context of OWS. Additionally, Icarus Project materials have traditionally maintained relatively high production values, incorporating sophisticated layouts, rich graphics, and professional typography. This emphasis on a graphical style resulted in publications that were more readable and accessible than text-heavy counterparts, and required more intensive, highly skilled labor. Finally, the material we were assembling included highly contentious topics, such as the use of coercion/violence, forced hospitalization, and psychiatric medication. Especially in the context of our inclusive collaborative authoring process, these factors all contributed to many rounds of edits, revisions, and debates. The contributors struggled with deliberative consensus building, endemic to OWS, and valiant efforts were made to forge a cohesive voice that everyone would be happy associating their names with.

The core contributors to the project were geographically dispersed, including participants from Minneapolis, Richmond, San Francisco, Pittsburgh, New Hampshire, and Ohio. A small concentration of participants lived in New York, which became the hub of organizing around this project. The group hosted in-person edit-a-thons, where contributors met in person, with some of the remote contributors participating in real-time on conference call or over Skype. Early on we reached consensus around our tentative outline, the number of pages we were aiming for (approximately 35-40 pages; the final publication was 80 pages), and that the book would not be branded as an Icarus Project publication. While many of the contributors were affiliated with the Icarus Project, and the Icarus Project would be appropriately credited, it would not be placed center stage. The group was determined to incorporate perspectives beyond the project, and to involve contributors from outside the radical mental health movement.

#(In)Validating the mainstream#

Some of the participants in the project were new to the radical mental health conversation. They expressed their concern about creating a publication that would be welcoming to mainstream audiences, and not alienate them with insults and accusations.

>Contributor03: As a lurker on this list, I'd like to share some hopes and fears that have arisen for me as I've witness the development of _Rising Up without Burning Out_. I've long been committed to radical politics, but I'm just learning about radical mental health. Over the past couple of weeks I've closely followed this list... and attempted to both understand and explain this new (to me) and profoundly anti-oppressive conceptualization of "mental health."...

>But, I've struggled. Both to clearly understand how I can contribute to the application of radical mental health on the ground as well as how to persuade friends and colleagues that radical mental health can play an important role in a non-violent movement. Many of the "support" volunteers (including myself) at Occupy come from pretty conventional health/mental health settings and have a more mainstream approach. At OWS, there has been an obvious tension between these individuals and others with a more radical perspective. It would be great if this publication could directly acknowledge this tension and attempt to provide a bridge between these groups.

>Currently, some the language could be interpreted as blaming and exclusionary (e.g., "...Such mainstream approaches are therefore both product and tool of imperialism, capitalism, neoliberalism, and secularization; those very systems that Occupy is striving to undo...") and I worry it might serve to further divide the community, and not foster the goals of deepening understanding and acceptance.

>So....my question: How can this publication be an open invitation to explore a more radical approach to mental health while still validating different perspectives and contributions? (2011a)

Contributor03's question was taken seriously, and received a number of thoughtful responses. Contributor07 acknowledged the need for clear language, quoted some of these responses, and summarized a plan to respond to contributor03's challenge.

>Contributor07: [quoting Contributor06]: Complex problems demand holistic solutions, and psychiatry and pharma are an instrumental cog in the wheel of oppression. Have individual psychiatrists and particular medications helped people? For sure. But the system on the whole is broken and corrupt at multiple layers, probably beyond reform or repair. \*\*We are desperately struggling for conceptual revolutions that will foster paradigm shifts in ontology, epistemology, and ethics.\*\* When the underlying models are contested, communication can be stilted and awkward. Almost like we aren't speaking the same language. What assumptions do you think we have made that we can make more explicit? What kind of clarifying statements or disclaimers do you think we should add? How can you imagine us engaging and incorporating mainstream perspectives into our work? [end quote]

>I'd love to hear response to these questions - I think it could really help our dialog and make this document we're working on so much more useful. It's easy to write to the already converted. We need to imagine this writing reaching all kinds of folks who aren't steeped in radical mental health rhetoric. My experience, after 9 (!) years of working on the Icarus Project, is that it is incredibly powerful and useful to actually open up spaces where, from the start of the conversation, we make it clear that people who use diagnostic categories to describe themselves and people who think all the categories are bullshit are welcome, and that people who use psych drugs and people who would never touch them are all welcome. I think it gets really tricky when we have "service providers" who've been trained in the DSM language but don't have their own personal experiences on the inside of the psych system trying to "provide services" to people who've been in and out of the psych system.... I sincerely hear you [Contributor03] when you talk about trying to contribute to radical mental health "on the ground.".... I think one of our most important roles has to do with education, and if that's the case, I vote for us trying to be as clear and compelling as we possibly can with the language we're using. (2011a)

Contributor03 replied, thanking Contributor07 for his/her thoughtful reply. He/she later followed up with a more thorough responses to these questions, which were directly incorporated into the final publication:

> _>>> What assumptions do you think we have made that we can make more explicit?_

> The shear volume of materials on the Booki is a little overwhelming. Much of it is very accessible and nuanced, but I think there is ambiguity that may trigger fear in some people. Particularly, I believe it is important to directly address the questions that are the reoccurring points of discussion on this listserv and others: -what about meds? -what about hospitalization? -what to do if you believe someone is suicidal?

> Also, it would be helpful if early on in the document there was a succinct communication of the main tenets of the radical psych. This document requires a fair amount of work on the readers' part. And while that might be your intent, it is hard to inform or persuade people if you've already lost them... [it] might help [to] engage people who aren't as informed or literate as you guys:

>"1) the definitions around which behaviors are normal and abnormal is profoundly political 2) the primary goal of treatment should be empowerment and helping a person reach whatever their definition of healthy looks like rather than imposing a definition of health 3) many (most? all?) mental health issues are a response to trauma - personal trauma, familial trauma, social trauma, etc - and mental health must address the roots not only the symptoms 4) when it comes to consciousness and the brain, when it comes to neurochemistry and pharmacology there is so very much that we don't know, yet we treat people as if we did, and on a wider epidemiological level, we're making people worse. There is such a world of difference between humble questioning and informed consent and the current way the medical model plays out in real life - especially in institutional settings 5) consent and harm reduction are vital, not optional"

> _>>> What kind of clarifying statements or_ _disclaimers do you think we should add?_

> I really like the existing disclaimer. I believe is also important to acknowledge upfront that this document does not reflect the perspective of all Occupy participants. And that there is an active debate on the ground about how to best provide emotional support to protesters.

> _>>>_ _How can you imagine us engaging and incorporating mainstream perspectives_ _into our work?_

> My previous comments were unclear, but my intent was not that you validate mainstream \*perspectives\*... those ideas have plenty of exposure, but that you validate mainstream \*people\*. That you recognize that there many people who work in mainstream mental health settings ---some of whom are involved with Occupy---who are deeply committed to anti-oppressive practices, who are also end users of mental health care, who are also traumatized by working in profoundly unjust and under-resourced systems, and whose' goal is give to hope and support to very people most victimized by those systems. Yes we're cogs in a highly flawed system, but we can also be potential allies in any systemic change. Currently, this document ignores us, which I fear could result in further division instead of community building (2011b).

Exchanges like these were emotionally demanding, and required a great deal of patience on all sides to work through diplomatically. Undoubtedly, the project could have published something much faster had we not insisted on running an inclusive process, but we believed that by including these disparate perspectives, the resulting document would be more accessible, relevant, and useful. The final publication incorporated most of the feedback that Contributor03 provided, including succinct primers and introductions, and a visual design that was welcoming and accessible. A sustained interest in the book and its usage across a variety of contexts such as workshops and college courses, speak to the bridges it succeeded in building across disparate communities.

The _Mindful Occupation_ contributors dealt with conflict using an approach similar to Occupy's consensus-based decision making. As I will show in the next section, the difficulties inherent in this approach were exacerbated by the fact that most of the group's communication was conducted electronically, slowing down exchanges which were also more prone to misunderstanding. Building consensus was painstaking and onerous, and in rare circumstances, such as the section dealing with coercion, the group decided to eliminate content rather than publish a formulation that was disagreeable to some. In other circumstances the group was able to represent their conflicts explicitly, either by reformulating the material as a question to the reader, or by expressing multiple viewpoints within the text. The text was assembled as a guide, and many sections could be read independently. There was some redundancy between sections, as well as a variety of voices represented throughout the book. Some disagreements were appeased by emphasizing alternate treatments in other sections of the book. Some contributors took issue with one chapter's emphasis on the biomedical model, but through a series of sidebars they agreed that we should include a shortened version of that chapter, since it portrayed a style of support that one of the contributors valued, based on their lived experience.

The contributor's commitment to consensus required more time and energy than many had hoped for. When the group first convened, they had originally hoped to publish materials quickly. The scope of the project grew, and the book's length, aesthetic aspirations and larger ambitions stretched the project from weeks to months. What began as a series of handouts, grew into a zine, and ultimately, an 80 page, independently published book---complete with a perfectly bound spine, an ISBN number and a distributor. The contributors were uniformly satisfied with the final publication, which led directly to the OccupyAPA protests we will examine closely in the next chapter.

#Suicidal Thoughts, Violence, and Hospitalization#

Unsurprisingly, the sections relating to coercion, suicide, violence, medication, diagnosis, and hospitalization also generated tremendous controversy, which was challenging for the collaborators to navigate. In relation to a section outlining responses to a situation where someone might harm themselves, the issue of forced hospitalization surfaced. The draft in the booki read: "Coercion should only be used as a last resort, and to protect people from violence done by others, NOT to protect people from themselves."

> Contributor08 reacted: "Coercion should never be an option. I don't agree with this last sentence." (2011).

> Contributor04 responded: "This is really seeming to me like a case of principle being privileged over people. Who benefits from allowing someone in crisis to commit suicide rather than be hospitalized? Who benefits from waiting until a person who's posing a clear threat to others has harmed someone, and the situation becomes a police issue? As much as no one wants to be hospitalized against his or her will, the implicit assumption here that the criminal justice system is in any way less abusive is absurd. And once in the criminal justice system, odds are a person in crisis will end up spending some time in a really crap inpatient facility. It certainly isn't benefitting him or her, nor does it benefit any larger community. I'm sorry, this just seems like a ridiculous position to take to me." (2011).

Contributor05, the original author of the booki draft replied:

> @[contributor08]: I liked your edit as it's a bit clearer to read than my 1st draft, although the last sentence does still present coercion as an option, just gets more specific on the types of coercion one might use, I don't know if that was your intention. My basic idea was that coercion should only be used when it's that or let someone seriously harm others in the space, and that it shouldn't ever be used pre-emptively.

> @[contributor04]: I AM SO FUCKING SICK AND TIRED of hearing this bullshit "concern" from those who say opposing forced treatment is "principle being privileged over people". Guess what, a lot of us, I'd even say most of us, who are fighting against it aren't doing so because of our abstract principles of respect for civil liberties, but because \*we have been victims of abuse by an abusive system\*. Who are you to say that to lock people up is always better than "to leave people to their own devices", or more to the point, that it's \*ever\* an either-or choice? (2011).

This exchange was just one example of many that mirrored intractable standoffs between different positions within the mental health activist movements. As a project that was attempting to represent and help bridge some of these perspectives, one of the project's organizers wrote:

> Contributor01: The debate about forced treatment has been ongoing for decades and isn't going to be resolved in this zine. Personally, i find that a lot of people use "not wanting to use coercion" as a way to duck the hard questions of what needs to be done when there is clearly violence/coercion being used already and/or used in weird ways (it's okay to call the police, but not EMS)... [R]ight now there are mental health folks involved in occupy that see nothing wrong with regularly using 72 hour holds etc and some of this attitude has filtered down to medics. I think the best we can do is problematize that and ask questions. We don't need to provide the answers... (2011)

This sentiment was echoed and reinforced by contributor07:

> [I]t's the responsibility of folks like [us], who've been locked up against our wills to be good role models for the community and help people through crisis when we can with the skills we've developed from our own experiences going through the fire. but folks like us aren't always going to be there and i know for myself that i'm not always in a place to be able to help someone when they are desperate, especially if they're acting violent. once again, i find myself writing an email to a bunch of people i mostly don't know in real life, longing for the kind of intimacy where we know how to take care of one another when we're having a hard time. in the meantime, lets at least do our best to be respectful of each other's opinions and remember that we're all struggling together and hoping to put something out there in the world that's going to empower people. it's clear we're not going to agree on this issue, so lets expand our vision and get as creative about it as possible. (2011b)

Ultimately, the version we published, with everyone's consent, avoided making any absolute assertions. It also emphasized the importance of following up after the hospitalization:

> If considering hospitalization or incarceration, take responsibility for your decisions and be clear about your motives---it'll make your presence more effective. Don't send someone to the hospital or call the police because it's "better than doing nothing." Let people know about community resources, and together figure out ways to meet their needs without harming others. Calling the police or sending someone to the emergency room for mental health concerns should be a last resort, after consultation with friends and allies. Consider first the potential ramifications including imprisonment, deportation/ loss of immigration status, increased depression, undue medication, shame, a prison record, loss of custody/visitation rights, interruption of life, loss of anonymity, and health care debt, as well as further scrutiny of protests, police brutality, sensationalist media representations, and so on.

> If someone is hospitalized or incarcerated, follow through by organizing visits and other communication. When they come out, help them process why the support team made the decisions they did. Try to be receptive to their critique and/or anger and/or gratitude. (Imai et al., 2012: 44)

Our decision to include a range of stakeholders from diverse backgrounds slowed our process down significantly, but also resulted in a more balanced document that captured and embodied our underlying message, emphasizing the importance of incorporating multiple perspectives into the formulation of these recommendations. It was very challenging to blend some of the most radical voices with more traditional and pragmatic ones, but the effort yielded a more nuanced guide that was sensitive to the concerns of all the contributors. In addition to confronting the hard question about how to handle an emotional crisis, we tried to emphasize the importance of follow up---visiting patients, supporting them after discharge, and teaching protesters about the devastating impact of mental health bills and shortcomings of insurance, even for those who are insured. The collaborators aspired to raise questions and consciousness, without necessarily providing all the answers.

#What is Radical Mental Health?#

There were also many sections offering concrete guidance and practical advice. The book opens with a description of these aims, the background of the contributors, and the relevance to occupy.

> What you hold in your hands is a rough toolkit of ideas and visions. It is meant to be shared, discussed and used for action as the Occupy movement evolves... The folks who put together this booklet come from different backgrounds, all involved with on-the-ground Occupy protests in various cities and towns. Many of us have been working on issues of radical mental health and activism for quite some time, involved with groups such as the Icarus Project, MindFreedom International, and the Freedom Center. Others are mental health professionals and street medics who have been involved in supporting the Occupy protesters on the ground. What binds us together is respect for each other's personal experiences, and our commitment to community-based approaches to emotional support.... There is an urgent need to talk publicly about the relationship between social injustice and our mental health. We need to start redefining what it actually means to be mentally healthy, not just on an individual level, but on collective, communal, and global levels. (p. 10)

The _Mindful Occupation_ collaborators attempted to define radical mental health through a series of concepts and associations, including interconnectedness, diversity, embodied expertise, options and politics. We emphasized the importance of not dividing people into "normal" and "pathological", rather we try to see first a person, not a beaker full of neurotransmitters. We portrayed human experience as "a holistic convergence of social, emotional, cultural, physical, spiritual, historical, and environmental elements." (p. 15) Strangely, the idea that healing is fostered by community, peer-support and mutual aid has not been widely adopted by the mainstream. Mainstream psychiatry also refuses to critique society and injustice, and fails to incorporate this kind of analysis into their explanations of trauma and suffering.

We proposed that one of the important ways to invent and enact the new language we advocate is by creating safe spaces for people to share their own subjective narratives with each other, without judgment. This process is evident in the publication that emerged from the dialog around this project, as well as in workshops and teachins that followed the publication of this book. This publication represents an incremental step towards the development of new ways of talking about mental health and well being.

#Conclusion#

My experiences participating in the OWS Support group alongside my experiences collaborating on the _Mindful Occupation_ book were deeply transformative and helped solidify and clarify my understanding of the emerging wave of psychiatric resistance. Central to both projects was the question of voice---Who speaks, who listens, and who is involved in the production of knowledge? When I first began my fieldwork in Zuccotti I believed that if the mental health workers involved in Occupy were not receptive to the Icarus Project's messaging about the need for a new language to discuss mental illness, the Icarus Project needed to revise their message. The Icarus Project was forged in activist contexts, and from the beginning they challenged the clinical and diagnostic language of DSM, advocating for the importance of community, peer-support, and the acceptance of alternative narratives around mental health and illness. My experiences at Occupy provided me with a much clearer understanding of how difficult it can be to truly follow the disability right's mandate: "nothing about us without us".

To be clear, many of the mental health professionals at Occupy turned out to be strong allies with the mental health activists, but I was regularly surprised by the nature and degree of resistance by some of the mental health supporters to the perspectives and opinions of un-credentialed supporters like peers and former patients. As the exchanges above demonstrate, some of the professional social workers clung to their professional jargon, insisting it was simply innocuous professional shorthand, or that their patients preferred it. Others listened to the critiques, but rolled their eyes, looked restless and bored, or otherwise dismissed the concerns of the radical mental health activists as theoretical or esoteric. In the most extreme case, the psychiatrist who visited Zuccotti became visibly agitated and raised his voice in objection to the perceived attack on the legitimacy of his profession. The radical mental health activists involved in the _Mindful Occupation_ project also had a very difficult time listening to and incorporating perspectives different from their own, and these standoffs helped bring into relief the difference between the previous wave and the emerging wave of mental health activism. Activists representing the new wave went to greater lengths to listen to perspectives outside of the own, and to entertain ideas outside of their comfort zones.

One important lesson to emerge from these interactions is that healing and education take a great deal of time and energy. There is no one-liner, however potent, that will alter entrenched habits and ideologies. Many of these beliefs are deeply ingrained, through years of professionalization or traumatic experiences. As with any belief that exists within a network of other beliefs, resistance to change is dictated by emotional valences as much as rational deliberation. It is easy to imagine that when the professional social workers were thrust into a position of power, it was tempting for them to exercise this newfound superiority. Typically, in their institutional settings, social workers are at the bottom of the hierarchy, regularly looked own upon by psychiatrists and administrators. In psychiatric hospitals, psychiatrists, psychologists, and nurses earn higher salaries than social workers and command more respect and prestige. Social workers typically earn masters degrees, instead of MDs or PhDs, and though they may earn other certifications to practice counseling or therapy, many grapple with inferiority complexes comparing themselves to mental health professionals with terminal degrees. Similarly, when the radical mental health activists were given a setting where they could speak their mind to the psychiatric establishment, or at least a representative proxy for that establishment, it was tempting for them to disregard the individual people on the receiving end of their venomous attacks.

The radical mental health activists also learned how much work they have ahead of them in terms of spreading and popularizing their message. Many of the social workers were eager and receptive to learn more about radical mental health, and how they might apply it's lessons in practice. However, even among the Occupy supporters, many had not heard of some of the leading Mental Health activist projects, and their primary association with psychiatric resistance was the caricature of resistance popularized by anti-psychiatry. Occupy provided an important stage to introduce these topics, as the event brought together a diverse cross-section of activists from a variety of backgrounds working on a diverse set of issues. In the course of these efforts it became clear how urgent and important it was to continue teaching and promoting these ideas. Occupy attracted a range of social critics, but almost without exception, none of Occupy's leaders or theorists incorporated a critique of the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex into their analysis of power and society. These issues were not broached in the stump speeches of Cornel West, Noam Chomsky, Slovak Zizek, Naomi Klein or countless others, and as _Mindful Occupation_ argues, the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex plays a vital role in maintaining the socio-economic status quo, playing a vital role in supporting stigma and alienation, and contributing to social and economic inequality.

Our country has been in a social recession far longer than the financial one. It will take a long time to unlearn our self-defeating habits and embrace languages of compassion and liberation, instead of mistrust and fear. First, we need to believe in the future---vividly imagine it, talk about it and manifest it. This movement, and activism in general, is notorious for its cycles of energetic bursts of creativity, followed by a crash. We have to be self-aware of these patterns, and take better care of ourselves and each other. We need to be more honest with ourselves about what we can tackle, learn how to recognize our triggers, learn how to say no, and learn how and when to bottom-line, delegate and collaborate. We especially need to avoid replicating habits of exploitation and oppression in our day-to-day interactions. We need to actively build our support networks when we are well, and create wellness plans that our friends can use to help support us when we aren't. But, mostly, we need to re-learn how to breathe, share and trust.