{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \\chapter\{
\fs24 Mad Horizons
\fs28 \}\\label\{chapter-six\}\
\
\\cleanchapterquote\{We're all mad here.\}\{
\fs24 Cheshire Cat
\fs28 \}\{Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\} \
\
My personal engagement with The Icarus Project began in Winter 2005 when I encountered a journalism student's article in the Columbia News Service entitled "A new movement views bipolar disorder as a dangerous gift" (Itzenson, 2005). Itzenson's article spotlighted The Icarus Project, and characterized the project as pioneering a new movement, more nuanced and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://ED5FF6A6-CACE-4662-A043-5BEF3DC8464D"}}{\fldrslt ambiguous}} than its predecessors. There is a history of mental illness and emotional distress in my family, and I responded to the article by directly emailing Sascha DuBrul, the project's co-founder and sharing some of my own writing on creativity and madness. Throughout my studies the theme of madness surfaced in contexts such as explaining consciousness, understanding creativity and interpreting ancient and religious texts. DuBrul replied enthusiastically to an essay I sent him about prophecy, creativity and madness and we began corresponding (Bossewitch, 1995). In December 2005 I attended my first organizing meeting, and was soon consulting with other volunteers on how the project could improve its communications strategy and technical infrastructure. Through these encounters I began to learn more about the wider c/s/x movement, its history, politics and ideology.\
\
During this time I was working as a full-time software developer and attending Teachers College in the Communications and Education program. I was studying critical information studies with an emphasis on privacy, transparency and surveillance. In the Fall of 2006 I became embroiled in an incident that would later form the basis of my Masters thesis, and was also a pivotal turning point in the direction of my academic focus. The scene I entered began in a Federal District courtroom where the pharmaceutical corporation Eli Lilly was defending itself from a class action lawsuit alleging the harmful side-effects of their multi-billion dollar blockbuster drug Zyprexa (_olanzepine_), an atypical anti-psychotic approved for the treatment of schizophrenia. A witness for the plaintiffs decided to leak thousands of incriminating documents that were enjoined, sealed by the judge to expedite discovery. The documents implicated Lilly in knowingly downplaying the side effects of Zyprexa. These internal memos showed that Lilly scientists and executives had known for over a decade that Zyprexa causes diabetes, and not merely obesity as the class action suit alleged. The memos also showed that Lilly had actively marketed Zyprexa "off-label", and their salespeople had created an internal marketing campaign, code-named "Viva Zyprexa!", designed to push the powerful drug on children with behavioral disorders and seniors with dementia.\
\
I wrote a more complete account of the actions that followed the leaks of these memos in an article published in re-public magazine, "The ZyprexaKills campaign: Peer production and the frontiers of radical pedagogy." (Bossewitch, 2007) In summary, essential findings from the memos were published by the New York Times in a series of front-page investigative stories. Subsequently, a group of activists began analyzing the primary sources and were soon defending their First Amendment rights against a legal action instigated by Eli Lilly. Utilizing an array of legal instruments, Lilly's lawyers attacked the digital sites where activists were analyzing the documents, and attempted to shut down their efforts. The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), a non-profit impact law firm dedicated to defending digital civil rights, agreed to represent the activists against the suppression of their speech under the "prior restraint" provision of the First Amendment.\
}