{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Jonah Doe#\
\
In January 2007 I personally became a client of the EFF and agreed to have them represent me against Lilly and defend my right to speak. The circumstances of this case converged around my intellectual and activist passions. At this point in my life I was an active supporter of the EFF, and active in the "free culture" movement, a direct descendant of the free speech movement and was becoming more engaged in psychiatric resistance. As a part of this action I also chose to exercise my First Amendment right to litigate anonymously, and the EFF protected my identity by referring to me throughout the case as "John Doe". At the time I was concerned about the attention and coverage the case might generate, especially since I did not know how the case would unfold. To this day I am relieved that not a single court briefing or newspaper article about the case bears my name, and internet searches for me are not dominated by results detailing my involvement in a provocative First Amendment action around an anti-psychotic. Stigma continues to surround activism and mental health issues, and I felt it was important to exert whatever control I could manage over my public reputation. I am disclosing my identity for the first time now since almost a decade has passed, and this experience was pivotal and transformative. My direct involvement in this case helped set the course for this entire project.\
\
The six weeks I spent as a client of the EFF were among the most harrowing of my life. Since the entire action was a sidebar in the larger class-action suit there were no formal charges filed against me. However, the presiding judge had the power to hold me in criminal contempt of court if he determined I had knowingly conspired to violate his injunction, a ruling that could have resulted in large fines and/or incarceration. Though I knew I was innocent, anything can happen in open court, and each day brought new developments and court briefs that might affect the outcome of my case. I was riveted by the proceedings, and devoured every document as they appeared. My reaction to Lilly's court briefs was often a mixture of frustration, horror, indignation and disbelief. I observed Lilly's lawyers framing and interpreting the facts in ways that distorted reality. They alleged conspiracies where none existed, ascribed nefarious motives without supporting evidence for these insinuations, and repeatedly tried to unmask my anonymous standing. The experience provided me with a crash course on First Amendment law as well as powerful case study on activist communications strategies and how a stories travel through the media ecosystem.\
\
A professional investigative journalist on the mental health beat became a close confidant, and we corresponded daily about developments in the case and the contents of the ZyprexaKills memos. My hunger for news surrounding the case was insatiable and I started researching and following news across the entire pharmaceutical industry. I learned about corruption and malfeasance across the sector, and that Lilly's crimes were typical, not exceptional. I learned about the toxic side-effects of the entire class of anti-psychotics, even the new generation of so-called "atypical" anti-psychotics. Most importantly, I learned what it was like for a journalist to cover a beat, and the essential function that professional journalists serve in making sense of complex narratives. By the time the judge issued his ruling I had gained a fresh understanding for how this domain constituted a legitimate field of academic research, and how urgent, important and neglected this research is.\
}