{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Corrective Lenses#\
\
These experiences led me to view the work of the Icarus Project in a fresh light. The ZyprexaKills campaign opened my eyes to the changing landscape of mental health treatment, and I became more conscious of the corruption and largely unchecked power of the pharmaceutical industry alongside their peculiar alliance with psychiatry. This alliance is one of the factors standing in the way of involving patients in knowledge making, and psychiatrists, journalists, and patients all recognize the industry's profit-driven motives. I spotlighted the dramatic expansion of psychiatric-pharmaceutical influence earlier in Chapter 2, which focused on the growth of the pediatric bipolar diagnosis. And, as the psychiatric context shifted and evolved, so did the language of resistance.\
\
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, my initial exposure to The Icarus Project was via an article entitled "A new movement views bipolar disorder as a dangerous gift." The Icarus Project membership tended to be young and well-educated, though many were unaware of the history of psychiatric resistance in the 20\\textsuperscript\{th\} century before joining the project. With their openness to psychiatric medications and diagnoses, Icaristas believed they were breaking with the past, and viewed their movement as innovative and fresh. They described themselves in these terms, and this narrative was often represented in the mainstream press, in publications such as the _New York Times,_ (Glaser, 2008; Heffernan, 2010) _Newsweek_, (Quart, 2009) and _O, The Oprah Magazine_. (Quart, 2013)\
\
When I began this project I also viewed The Icarus Project through this lens, as a distinctly new voice with a fresh message that broke from the ideas of R.D. Laing, Thomas Szasz and Peter Breggin, who all demonized psychiatry, and to varying degrees, denied the existence of mental illness and any value in psychiatric medications. I started this project with the belief that The Icarus Project represented the cutting edge of the movement, and in many important respects I still believe this is the case. My research and analysis has focused on trying to understand how the project is different\'97What did the cacophonous voices of the membership express over the past decade? In what ways is this message different than previous generations of the c/s/x movement?\
\
Through my interactions with the community over the years I have learned that members of Icarus generally share inclusive attitudes and a tolerance for diversity, but they don't explicitly share consistent justifications for their positions or beliefs. The analysis of the underlying justifications that I advance in this dissertation is under-theorized within the community itself. Positions are often justified based on intuitions and gut feelings and members of the community sometime find it difficult to represent their beliefs and persuade others to take their perspectives seriously. What seems to be missing is a framework that grounds these critiques, a concise articulation of the commonalities among this collection of sprawling perspectives and expressions.\
\
Throughout this dissertation I have emphasized the importance of a plurality of voices in the construction of psycho-social knowledge, and the power of the mantra "nothing about us without us" that is {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://2649023C-4F41-4306-B2BF-2933B81F7A89"}}{\fldrslt implicit}} in the language and advocacy of The Icarus Project. Icaristas' behaviors embody participatory ethics, but this emphasis is partially mine, as this rhetorical formulation has not been widely and crisply articulated in the movement's public communications. This formulation is implied, but not uniformly articulated, as the movement is currently in the process of clarifying and refining its own message. The absence of clarity suggests an important direction for the movement, which would be greatly strengthened by a sharper framing and vision. My analysis is grounded on years of conversations and interactions as well as on the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://B95DDBF1-5E73-423C-95FF-53C1E07E4ACD"}}{\fldrslt soup of sentiments}} present in the Icarus Project's voluminous communications, especially when contrasted with the movement's historical predecessors.\
\
My interpretive stance is an attempt to make sense of multiple expressions demanding an inclusive role in the production of knowledge and policy. Sometimes the activist's expressions imply this demand sometimes they make it explicitly. A powerful argument motivates their story-telling, what I have called "narrative advocacy", and crystalizing this argument is the next step in this movement's growth. This argument's novelty is evident in the popular misconception that all resistance to psychiatry rejects the existence of mental illness, and throughout this project I encountered surprise and enthusiasm around an alternative perspective. Beyond narrative advocacy, the movement has the opportunity to learn from ACT-UP and begin participating directly in the production of scientific research that bears on their condition. With notable exceptions, such as Kay Jamison (1996), researchers who self-identify as mad have been historically scarce. A new generation of academic social scientists, including Emily Martin (2007), Nev Jones, and Timothy Kelley (2015) are actively contributing to our understanding of madness from the perspective of people who have received psychiatric diagnoses and treatment, and are providing crucial bridges between academia and activism.\
\
The movement's messaging has an opportunity to align itself with the messaging of other oppressed groups by framing their objections around the sins of being excluded from the production of knowledge and policy that directly affects them. Inclusion is shorthand for the kinds of ideas that this participation will incorporate, and the examples that follow below suggest how this participation might alter perspectives, training and support.\
}