{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##MADLOVE: A Designer Asylum##\
\
>_Is it possible to go mad in a positive way? How would you create a safe place in which to do so? If you designed your own asylum, what would it look like?_\
\
These are the questions motivating "MADLOVE: A Designer Asylum", an innovative art project-cum-intervention that previewed in Liverpool, England in the Spring of 2015. The project is compelling since it demonstrates an act of resistance that does not demonize psychiatry or condemn asylums outright. Rather, it suggests a middle ground for critiquing the asylum precisely along the lines I argue the movement is advancing\'97by listening to the voices of the people on the receiving end of the asylum's services\
\
The installation was featured as a part of an exhibit entitled "Group Therapy: Mental Distress in a Digital Age" and was on display from March 5, 2105 through May 17, 2015. James Leadbitter, aka "The Vacuum Cleaner", was the 34 year-old lead designer who describes himself as an "art and activism collective of one". (2015) Leadbitter's work has appeared at the Tate Modern and Chicago's Museum of Contemporary Art, and he has struggled with his mental health most of his adult life. He has been institutionalized in the UK multiple times, including for almost a year when he was 18.(Taylor, 2015) He experienced institutionalization as punishing rather than loving, more like a prison than a hospital. He actively wonders how we can transform our support for people undergoing mental distress and create beautiful, enticing and supportive environments for their recovery.\
\
Leadbitter collaborated with Hannah Hull, the show's producer who is currently a doctoral candidate at Goldsmiths at the Institute for Creative and Cultural Enterprise. Hull also consults on "creative practices for social change" and describes herself as a "situation-specific artist" who creates "social sculpture and political interventions".(Hull, 2015) The Foundation for Art and Creative Technology (FACT) commissioned the project with support from the British Psychological Association in collaboration with the Welcome Trust foundation.\
\
The installation that previewed at FACT was preceded by a series of workshops throughout the Fall of 2014. Leadbitter and Hull conducted workshops around the UK that brought together mental health professionals, artists, academics, designers and particularly people with lived experience in the mental health system. Over 300 people participated in these workshops and their contributions were translated into design principles and the final installation. Participants were prompted to imagine happiness, health and wellness across a spectrum of sensory inputs. How does good mental health taste, smell, sound, touch, look? They explored what "objects, sounds, smells, colors, shapes, food, facilities and activities we need to create safety around 'madness'?"(Taylor, 2015)\
\
>Participants dreamed of an asylum where there were no corridors, of walls that could change color, of a Library with books floor to ceiling and DVDs filed under 'Happy Ending' and 'Sad Ending', where there was a Trampoline Room, a Tree House, a Smash Room, all laid out in a building set near a river close to a forest, where there were no passive-aggressive signs and the emphasis was on meditation, not medication. (O'Donoghue , 2014)\
\
The workshops were well facilitated, and the facilitators avoided most conflict by listening to all participants, and filtering out some suggestions in their artistic translation. Not all of the workshops were published online, and it is unclear if there were disruptions, and if so, how the groups handled them and how prevalent disagreements were in this process. The asylum they designed has also never been field tested, and the group avoided some of the harder questions of what kinds of asylum policies would accompany their architecture. Under what, if any, circumstances would patients be forcibly separated, medicated or isolated? What rules would govern intake and discharge? These policies are as important as architecture in governing a patient's asylum experience.\
\
Some of the participant's visions are reminiscent of a children's playground, but they also presented nuanced views of privacy zones, ranging from private (with the patient in control of their seclusion) to semi-private to a bird's eye view of the ward. There was an emphasis on nature\'97the smell of the ocean, the sounds of birds and laughter, views of trees and flowers\'97as well as the surreal. A young man in Birmingham remarked: "All I want is a room with Faberg\'e9 eggs and a hammer."\
\
Leadbitter and Hull contrasted the participants' responses with the stark reality of institutional design. Its utilitarian furniture, drab colors and prison-like aesthetic reinforced distress and misery. Promotional materials for mental hospitals often feature bucolic settings, but in Leadbitter's experience there was "No green landscape. No rainbow. No butterfly.", as featured on their brochures.\
\
The final art installation was a cross between a Dr. Seuss book and Salvador Dali's house. It features a ceiling strung with upside down umbrellas, a lush teal carpet, an orange-striped "cooling tower", and a pastel pink cabin referred to as "Turkish delight". The cooling tower is lined with pillows and functions as "a humorous twist on the padded cell," where people can retreat to cry or scream without being locked in. There is a stairway to nowhere, lined with a bookshelf full of books, selected by workshop participants. The welcome desk contains bottles filled with various pleasant scents, such as lavender and cinnamon. James Christian, an architect who contributed to the project writes: "Each structure, is an abstract interpretation of the feedback from the workshops, designed to offer varying levels 'of privacy and intimacy ranging from total isolation to complete togetherness.'" (Hohenadel, 2015)\
\
An unnamed, middle-aged workshop participant interviewed following a workshop reflected on his experience:\
\
>The lightbulb moment was the idea of taking ownership\'85 Where it fell down a bit, is how do you care for people that don't want to be cared for? How do you look after people who are in [the] mental health [system] but are unwilling to recognize they are in crisis? That was missing. But there was a real collective sense of wanting to create something real and actual. The energizing thing about was that it wasn't wishy-washy or hippie-dippy; it was based on real experience... a collective sense of wanting to create something real and actual. (O'Donoghue, 2014)\
\
Here again we see that people asserting their voice by designing their psychiatric treatment is a fundamental, but surprising shift. A position that seems obvious once articulated is novel due to its rareness. According to this workshop participant, challenging questions around coercion and safety were avoided, but were present as a perpetual backdrop. While some of the designs imagined by the participants are impractical or unsafe, many could prove beneficial and effective. Following through on the design of a loving and supportive space must involve the input of all of the participants in that space. Crucially, the MADLOVE project does not deny the existence of mental distress, or even the value of safe institutional respites for support and healing. This radical expression emerges vividly from a straightforward application of "nothing about us, without us".\
\
Leadbitter and Hull fully intend to continue developing this project after the installation closes. They continue to tour, plan to bring their designs to the UK's National Health Service, and have even talked about opening their own day hospital. They continue to advocate that design is important, and are committed "to creat[ing] unique space[s] where mutual care blossoms, stigma and discrimination are actively challenged, divisions understood, and madness can be experienced in a less painful way." (Disability Arts Online, 2014).\
\
The MAD LOVE asylum is a clear example of applying the principle of "Nothing about us without us" to mad advocacy. While the project is not as radical as some experiments in non-coercive respite houses, it demonstrates the kinds of value the perspectives of patients can bring to the production of asylums, as well as how patient advocacy is not purely black and white in its criticism of the status quo. The participants in the designer asylum do not reject the need for asylums, but they do object to their current implementation, and the fact that they are excluded from participating in designing these facilities.}