{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Understanding Psychosis##\
\
In 2014 the British Psychological Society, a professional association representing psychologists and psychology in in the UK, published a controversial report entitled "Understanding Psychosis and Schizophrenia". The report acknowledges the role of trauma, abuse or deprivation in the development of extreme experiences, talks about the advantages and disadvantages in calling these experiences symptoms of mental illness, and emphasizes the role of talking treatments in helping people make sense of their lives. The report also claims that "professionals should not insist that people accept any one particular framework of understanding, for example that their experiences are symptoms of an illness", and insists that "services need to change radically, and that we need to invest in prevention by taking measures to reduce abuse, deprivation and inequality." (p. 6) Contributors to the BPS report included leading experts and researchers in the field and "more than a quarter of the contributors are experts by experience --- people who have themselves heard voices, experienced paranoia or received diagnoses such as psychosis or schizophrenia." (p. 5)\
\
The report was directed at therapists and practitioners, and was initially launched at a daylong conference in London on November 27, 2014. The conference program included academics, activists, contributors as well as the Shadow Minister for Public Health and Mental Health. A much wider audience engaged with this report, and reviews and responses have appeared in the _BBC_ (Hill, 2014), _The Guardian_ (Freeman & Freeman, 2014), _The New York Times_ opinion pages (Luhrmann, 2015), _The Huffington Post_ (Frances, 2014b), and the mass-market magazine _Psychology Today_ (Davey, 2014; Maisel, 2014). The authors of the report worked hard to draft a document with a widely inclusive tone that incorporates a variety of perspectives and highlights the uncertainty in prevailing scientific explanations. It is rare for an association of mental health professionals to endorse such a blunt critique of psychiatric knowledge, and to admit alternative treatments and modalities of care. The report discusses the risks and benefits of taking psychiatric drugs, differentiates between acute and long-term pharmaceutical interventions, and questions evidence around specific accounts of the drug's mechanism of action.\
\
The editors cite ambiguous studies of patient outcomes and spotlight individuals who are thriving without medication and positions drugs as one of many viable treatment options, not an absolute. (Slade, Amering & Oades, 2008; Van Os, Linscott, Myin-Germeys, Delespaul & Krabbendam 2009; Zipursky, Reilly & Murray, 2012) They claim "prescribers need to help people to weigh up the risks and benefits of taking particular drugs or indeed taking medication at all. People need to be able to try things out and arrive at an informed choice. Services should not pressurise people to take medication." (p. 55) Throughout the report, users of mental health services are quoted taking various positions, illustrating the benefits and downsides of different treatment regimes. The service users are treated as experts on their own lived experience, promoted to first class participants in the describing and evaluating their own care. The report questions the justification for various forms of coercion, stating that while compulsory detention may sometimes be justified, a UN task force has called for a ban on forced drugging, electroconvulsive therapy, restraints and seclusion (p. 110). The report also recognizes emotional suffering, and the role of professional treatment. Stories of professional support appear alongside those of pain and trauma, and they cite patients who have thrived after abandoning traditional psychiatric treatment. Its radical perspective is most evident in the call for providers to accept views other than the illness model, the call for collaboration to replace paternalism, and recognition of the role that social injustice and inequality plays in triggering individual pathologies.\
\
The report became a polarized lighting rod, and it was simultaneously praised by some for its "remarkable" rejection of the centrality of diagnosis and also accused by others of drumming up psychiatric hate-mongering (Luhrmann, 2015; Coyne, 2015). It was challenged on multiple grounds, including the research methods employed, the publication format, and paradigmatic frame. Beyond their rational critique, establishment reviewers sounded infuriated by the report and lashed out with insults and putdowns:\
\
>_Understanding Psychosis_ should be seen as a cruel hoax perpetrated against more typical severely disturbed mental health service users, their family, and policymakers. (Coyne, 2015)\
\
Responding to a positive editorial review of the report written by Stanford anthropologist Tanya Marie Luhrmann, Columbia University's Chairman of Psychiatry and past president of the American Psychiatric Association, Jeffery Lieberman, attacked the journalistic integrity of _The New York Times_ for publishing her review, and questioned the legitimacy of an anthropologist "opining on the scientific validity of [a medical specialty's] diagnoses":\
\
>The article about mental illness was an incredibly unscholarly, misinformed, confused\'97at worst, unhelpful, and at best, destructive---commentary that will add to the confusion about the diagnosis of mental illness, enhance the stigma, and may lead some patients to doubt the veracity of the diagnoses that they have been given and the treatments that they are receiving\'85 What would give an anthropologist license to comment on something that is so disciplined, bound in evidence, and scientifically anchored? (Lieberman, 2015)\
\
Lieberman exhibits a na\'efve view of scientific knowledge, denying the role that scientific communities and personalities play in constructing knowledge and mythologizing the evidence-bound scientific discipline. The sociological basis underlying the formulation and acceptance of scientific facts has been well established by philosophers (Kuhn, 1962) and sociologists of science (Latour, 1993; Ross, 1996), and is the starting point for the academic discipline of Science and Technology Studies. In 1975 the Society for the Social Studies of Science was founded to "facilitate communication across conventional boundaries that separate the disciplines" (especially scholars in "sociology, anthropology, history, philosophy, political science, economics, and psychology" and "working scientists and engineers interested in the social aspects of their fields") who are engaged in research  examining "the creation, development, and consequences of science and technology in their cultural, historical, and social contexts." (Society for the Social Studies of Science, n.d.). Considering the formidable force of this intellectual history, perhaps we ought to ask what gives Lieberman the license to revoke Lurmann's right to speak?  \
 \
 Lieberman believes that only psychiatrists are qualified to speak about treatment, insists that psychiatric research is objective, based on "hard scientifically grounded" evidence, and fails to appreciate the values imposed by the narrative frame. In response to the report's contention that there is no sharp dividing line between mental illness and normality, Lieberman writes: "Although everyone knows that there is a spectrum of severity of symptoms in the context of an illness, there is no question that, at some point, they cross a threshold that defines symptoms as an illness." Anthropologists such as Luhrmann have a great deal to say about the construction of this threshold\'97who determines it, how they determine it, and how has it shifted over time. In effect, there is a question. Lieberman continues: "Viewing it this way is, in a way, challenging the veracity of diagnoses and giving people who have symptoms of a mental disorder, license to doubt that they may have an illness and need treatment." Here, Cooke and Luhrmann would likely agree. The report does challenge the veracity of diagnosis, drawing on a range of methods and evidence.\
\
An intriguing line of critique is the claim that _psychiatrists'_ voices were stifled its creation, and this omission undermined the legitimacy of the findings:\
\
>Key stakeholders were simply excluded \'96 primary care physicians, social workers, psychiatrists, police and corrections personnel who must make decisions about how to deal with disturbed behavior, and \'96most importantly- the family members of persons with severe disturbance. There was no check on the psychologists simply slanting the document to conform to their own narrow professional self-interests, which we are asked to accept as "expertise." (Coyne, 2015)\
\
>Of note, I didn't see any psychiatrists named as contributors to the report, but I'm happy to be corrected. (Laws, Lanford & Huda, 2014)\
\
The insistence on incorporating stakeholders in the creation of this document is particularly ironic, since psychiatry has perpetrated this exclusion for decades. As the dominant actors, there are ample platforms available for psychiatrists to express themselves, as their voices represent the mainstream status quo and are amplified by the pharmaceutical juggernaut. None of the stakeholders enumerated in this critique are consulted in the composition of the DSM, and similarly, there is "no check" on psychiatrists "simply slanting the document to conform to their own narrow professional self-interests". The report might have garnered more legitimacy with psychiatrist contributors, but it extensively cites psychiatric journals and studies, and many of the psychologists who contributed have appointments at psychiatric institutes. Notably, Coyne ignores the inclusion of people diagnosed with psychiatric conditions and their lived expertise, as he snidely dismisses the expertise of clinical psychologists with scare quotes.\
\
The voice of psychiatry can be heard throughout this report, explicitly through citations, and implicitly, through the hegemonic paradigm this report challenges. Non-human actors, such as the DSM and studies endorsing the medical model, speak on psychiatry's behalf. There is certainly a vocal minority of psychiatrists who might have participated in this report, but their absence does not undermine the report's legitimacy. We need to acknowledge mechanisms for challenging the dominant paradigm even if the powers under assault refuse to participate in this critique.\
\
The _Understanding Psychosis_ report also quotes the language of The Icarus Project to illustrate alternative frames used by people use to describe their altered states. "Self-help organization _The Icarus Project_ views both 'psychotic' and 'bipolar' experiences as 'a dangerous gift' and aims to help its members 'navigate the space between brilliance and madness'" (p. 53). The authors of the report did not directly consult with members of The Icarus Project, but The Icarus Project was elevated to a stakeholder by virtue of its inclusion. The ensuing discourse surrounding the report's publication reveals the position of the psychiatric establishment. The credibility of the British Psychological Association proved difficult to ignore, and mainstream US psychiatrists were compelled to listen to them, even if, on the whole, their response was demeaning and dismissive. This is more than can be said about the voices people without professional credentials but who possess an informal expertise that derives from self-study and lived experience. Their critiques are rarely heard or responded to, and demanding this recognition needs to become a central platform of the c/s/x movement.\
\
It is intriguing that both the designer asylum project and the _Understanding Psychosis_ report came out of the UK, begging the question of cross cultural comparison. The UK has a strong history of Critical Psychiatry, which resembles the APA's radical caucus, but has greater traction and a larger membership. Perhaps underlying the strength of the Critical Psychiatry network and the greater popularity of these ideas is the UK's universal health care. Much of the conversation around US mental health policy is caught up in the question of access to services, whether or not those services are beneficial or harmful. In the UK, and other countries with socialized medicine (e.g., Finland, where the OpenDialogue method was pioneered), where _access_ to services is assured, the conversations around mental health policy can focus on the _nature_ of services.\
\
}