{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies##\
\
On March 7, 2015 I attended a lecture given by Mark Solms entitled "Neuropsychoanalysis:  Dangers and Opportunities" at NYU's School of Medicine. Over one hundred people attended the lecture, and the lecture hall was literally standing room only. Solms is part of an emerging movement to incorporate psychoanalysis into the study of neuroscience, and his talk was aimed at a general audience and was not focused specifically on pathologies. Solms spent a long time in his presentation discussing theories of mind, and regularly attends conferences on consciousness alongside neuroscientists and analytic philosophers of mind (notably, he mentioned that clinicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists are typically absent from those conferences). He describes himself as a "dual-aspect monist", explaining his commitment to avoiding mind-body dualism, while maintaining that the language of feelings cannot be simply reduced or translated to the language of neurons, and that both discourses remain valuable and meaningful. His research program aims to advance the psychoanalytic program, with the generous incorporation of neuroscientific findings where helpful, alongside the infusion of neuroscience with psychoanalytic knowledge.\
\
Solms connects Freud's theories of mind to neurological research, but maintains that the two discourses inform one other, and can't be simply translated or reduced. He views neuropsychoanalysis as completing Freud's program, revising and correcting it based on new evidence. The neurospychoanalysts interpret neuroscience findings as a confirmation of Freud's central ideas, including unconscious motivation, repression, the pleasure principle, and the id/ego/superego. Solms has argued that the brain's "seeking system" may be the basis for Freud's libido drive, and has used cognitive neuroscience findings on aphasia to interpret narcissistic tendencies (Solms, M., & Turnbull, O. 2002).\
\
Solms is perhaps most famous for engaging in a decade-long debate with Allan Hobson, professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School, over the relevance of Freud to neuroscience and especially over the significance of dreams. A detailed summary of the details of their debate is not relevant to this dissertation, but I include a sketch of their debate to provide some texture. Hobson's research on the neurological mechanisms of dreaming aims to show that dreams are effectively random, and that emotional interpretations of dreams are misguided. Dream interpretation is one of the foundational methods of Freudian analysis, and rendering dreams meaningless is an assault on psychoanalysis itself. Solms deliberately designed a research program with the aim of salvaging dreams, and through a series of clever experiments with brain-lesion patients, demonstrated that dreams are in fact generated by a network of structures in the brain associated with instinctual-motivational circuitry. Solms helped render Freud's wish-fulfillment theory of dreams respectable again, and in April 2006 Solms and Hobson met for the first time for a formal "Dream Debate" in Tuscon, Arizona at a conference entitled 'Toward a Science of Consciousness'. The debate was the culmination of a series of standoffs in journal articles, books, and a pair of articles in _Scientific American_. Other researchers have challenged the pairs' methods and conclusions, and have argued that Hobson and Solms have used their evidence around dreaming to advance their respective beliefs about Freud. (Dumhoff, 2005)\
\
As we saw earlier in Chapter 4, and as Brad Lewis argues in "Where is US Psychiatry Going? From the Biomedical Model to Neuropsychiatry" psychiatry is poised to embrace neuroscience along with information processing models of cognition and pathology (in press). In the wake of the publication of the DSM-5, the National Institute of Mental Health announced that it would be "re-orienting its research away from the DSM-5" and will be "collecting the genetic, imaging, physiologic, and cognitive data to see how all the data \'96 not just the symptoms \'96 cluster and how these clusters relate to treatment response." (Insel, 2013) The Obama administration's BRAIN (Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies) initiative alongside the European Union's Human Brain Project are both modeled on the Human Genome Project and seek to map every neuron and brain circuit in the human brain. As with the genome, there is some recognition of the uniqueness and diversity of individual brains, but there are also assumptions being made about uniform features across individuals and demographics. The theory of "neuroplasticity", the idea that brain structures continue to change as we learn, has gained acceptance among neuroscientists, challenging even further our ability to make generalizations about an individual's brain. The BRAIN initiative's website describes the project as follows:\
\
>By accelerating the development and application of innovative technologies, researchers will be able to produce a revolutionary new dynamic picture of the brain that, for the first time, shows how individual cells and complex neural circuits interact in both time and space. Long desired by researchers seeking new ways to treat, cure, and even prevent brain disorders, this picture will fill major gaps in our current knowledge and provide unprecedented opportunities for exploring exactly how the brain enables the human body to record, process, utilize, store, and retrieve vast quantities of information, all at the speed of thought. (The Brain Initiative, n.d.)\
\
These efforts and advances threaten to displace the biochemical paradigm that currently dominates psychiatric models. There is an air of inevitability around the encroachment of neuroscience and brain imaging into our understanding of brains and behaviors. In this context, Solms and the larger neuropsychoanalytic movement represent a leading hope for the incorporation of subjectivity, feelings and meaning into the psychiatric discourse. Yet, neuropsychoanalysis remains a fringe discipline, largely ignored by mainstream neuroscience.\
\
How will the c/s/x movement respond to these new realities and constructs? In a narrow sense, the encroachment of neuroscience on the biochemical model is consistent with decades of critique by those critical of psychiatry, and might be celebrated. But the questions remain: Is the emerging paradigm an improvement? Does it reinforce existing power dynamics?\
\
Undoubtedly, the movement's criticism of psychiatry is becoming stale as the underlying context shifts. However, many of the essential critiques we have distilled remain as relevant as ever. To begin with, Solms and the larger field of neuropsychoanalysis neglect a socio-cultural analysis in their models of pathology. Neuropsychoanalysts continue to locate all pathology within the heads of their patients, and do not {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://6CC81DD6-50F8-4566-A5F9-DC8A50FAAEBE"}}{\fldrslt broaden their analysis}} to include oppression, injustice and intergenerational trauma. Beyond this omission, a deeper critique of their approach centers on questions of authority and knowledge production. Although neuropsychoanalysis sounds more encompassing analytically, the scientist and/or psychotherapist make the important, defining judgments. The analysand may provide feedback to their analyst, but does not participate in the creation of the rubrics and models that shape their diagnosis and treatment. If this participation were an essential component of the treatment, at least there would be an opportunity and a mechanism to address the prior omissions of the socio-cultural factors. Such an approach would introduce many demands on the analyst, and require a flexibility that few schools of analysis exhibit. There are certainly gifted and caring analysts who adopt a more inclusive approach by virtue of their personality and values, treating each and every one of their patients as unique individuals. However, there is also overwhelming pressure to treat patients using assembly-line protocols, aimed to maximize efficiency and treat as many patients as quickly as possible, leaving little room for variation and context.\
\
Speculating on the impact of the neuropsychoanalytic frame is not simply a polemical exercise since psychiatric paradigms are shifting. The language and values that the Icarus Project has developed are still widely applicable to these emerging contexts, although clearer articulations of their beliefs and demands are important to distill. Overly simplistic rejections of the "biomedical model" risk exposing the group to charges of "anti-science", and being lumped in the same camp as the anti-vaccine movement or climate-change deniers. The richness of the language that the Icarus Project has developed expresses much more than the rejection of the biomedical model, and their critique may very well endure well beyond the lifespan of the biomedical model itself. By returning to the foundational assertion of self-determination, informed consent, and their right to participate in the co-construction of the knowledge of their own diagnosis and treatment the problems with neuropsychoanalysis are readily apparent.\
\
Many of the same issues The Icarus Project confronts under the existing psychiatric regime will continue to exist under whatever paradigm succeeds next. Informed consent, requiring access to accurate information, is becoming increasingly difficult to obtain in the face of a sea of information and misinformation. Pharma's marketing campaigns continue to grow in sophistication. When it comes to consent, technologies of surveillance continue advance coercive techniques through the enforcement of drug adherence and behavioral monitoring. Congress is poised to pass federal legislation extending involuntary outpatient treatment programs, modeled on New York State's Kendra's Law (1999) and California's Laura's Law (2002). Beyond the clear-cut cases of state mandated compliance, prisoners, seniors in nursing homes, and children are all constituents whose agency is limited and whose consent is questionable. And, as cultural pressure mounts to correct deviant behavior and perform according to prescribed standards, it is becoming more difficult to opt-out of treatment. Consent has become elusive, well beyond the obvious violations of state mandated forced treatment.\
\
}