{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Mad Futures#\
\
Recognition at the tables of power is only a precondition for the kinds of changes in treatment, attitude and policy that the movement would like see emerge. What might the regime of mental health look like if the activists prevailed? What would victory look like and what issues might displace the current priorities? What are the stakes of these showdowns and how do they intersect with broader trends in advocacy for social justice, freedom and equality?\
\
The BPA's report on _Understanding Psychosis_ does an excellent job painting a picture of what a treatment paradigm would look like if it incorporated a deep respect for the expertise of lived experience. This perspective is characterized by loving and compassionate support instead of punitive punishment, collaboration over patronization, and self-determination and informed consent over bullying and coercion. It is also clear that time and again stories of interpersonal and intergenerational trauma dominate the personal narratives of people struggling with their mental health and these histories need to be appreciated and acknowledged, not minimized and neglected. While various schools of psychoanalysis and forms of therapy try to deal with interpersonal and intergenerational trauma, these frames of treatment have been almost entirely displaced by dispensing pills. Tanya Luhrmann's ethnography of American psychiatry, _Of Two Minds_, identified the twin poles of the biomedical model and the psychodynamic model that dominated psychiatric training and clinical practice in the 1990s. This tension is almost unrecognizable today, as the biomedical model has come to completely dominate psychiatric practice in America (Martin, 2007).\
\
The problems with psychiatry do not begin and end with bedside manner, but a culture of arrogance and bullying exacerbates the doctor/patient relationship and undermines trust. People receiving treatment want to feel listened to. They want their experiences validated and they want to be treated like a person not a label. The language of their interactions should reflect these concerns and respect their agency, not assault them with a barrage of aggressions, micro- and macro-. Sayantani DasGupta's call in the _Lancet_ for "narrative humility" traces the problems in doctor's attitudes to an educational curriculum that certifies cultural mastery at the completion of a weekend workshop (2008).\
\
An Icarista's anecdote illustrates this dynamic: After ten years on a particular anti-depressant she wanted to try switching to another since they were dissatisfied with the drug she was taking. After a few weeks on the new drug she asked her doctor to help wean her off the new drug and wanted to return to the original one she had been taking. She believed that the new drug was causing panic attacks and extreme anxiety, and she experienced less anxiety when they reduced their own dosage. Their psychiatrist stubbornly refused to acknowledge that the new medication might cause anxiety and would not write them a prescription for their original medication. The Icarista asked the psychiatrist if he had ever taken the drug (he had not), and was hurt that her experience was belittled and dismissed. She had not asked to come off of her medication entirely, merely explore alternative medical treatments, but nonetheless she was rendered effectively invisible and powerless. Providers need to listen better and work together with their patients to create an environment of mutual respect and trust, conducive to long-term healing.\
\
C/s/x activists are also some of the most vocal advocates for examining the connections between systems of inequality and injustice and their correlations with mental illness. We live in a world where violent, self-destructive, and even suicidal policies are regarded as sane, and it's the captains of government and capital who ought to be restrained. War criminals, environment destroyers, and compulsive usurers walk free while those who speak truth to their power are often diagnosed and aggressively treated. Our consensual reality is crazy sick, and desperately needs an imagination infusion.\
\
These broader issues of injustice are inextricably linked to mental health, as numerous studies have linked poverty, racism, discrimination to mental health. (Link & Phelan, 1995; Cohen & Timimi 2008; Metzl & Hansen 2014) This is unsurprising as mental illness is also strongly correlated to stress and trauma and these systems of oppression generate an excess of both. Marginalized populations like minorities, prisoners, children in foster care, and the poor are also more likely to receive certain diagnoses and treatments. (Metzl, 2010; Levine, 2015) In these circumstances psychiatry become visible as an instrument for oppression and control, far exceeding its mandate to alleviate emotional suffering.\
\
Popular social justice leaders rarely incorporate the pharm-psychiatric complex into their analysis of power, even though it is an important cog in wheel of the systems they critique. It's accurate to say that the school-to-prison pipeline is greased with psychiatric diagnoses and treatments, as a diagnosis of Oppositional Defiance Disorder (ODD) is often the first step on the road to juvenile detention. Though stigma and shame, the system also perpetuates feelings of isolation and alienation that, in turn, help reinforce the growth of a range of '-isms' (capitalism, consumerism, neoliberalism, etc).\
\
Our current trajectory suggests dystopic futures, especially in light of the trend towards predictive diagnosis and treatment. As we saw in Chapter 2, prodromal diagnosis, also known as psychotic risk syndrome, threaten to expand psychiatry's reach exponentially. As Frances, the editor of the DSM-IV argued, the diagnoses of present conditions are already overly expansive. Diagnosing and treating people who are _at risk_ for developing these conditions will expand the diagnostic net to threatening proportions. Preventative treatment and algorithmic diagnoses pose a grave threat to civil liberties, analogous to the criminal profiling, the notorious "stop-and-frisk" practices of the NYPD (New York Civil Liberties Union, 2014) and the "signature kills" of the Obama administrations drone program (Shane, 2015). The counterfactual logic of this paradigm is slippery and dangerous\'97if you manifest symptoms, you are psychotic; if you have not manifested them, yet, you are prodromal. The treatment of prodromal patients who fail to develop symptoms is seen as a success, even though there is no reliable way to ascertain how they would have progressed without treatment.\
\
The threat of prodromal diagnoses looms even larger under the emerging neurobiological-information processing paradigm than it did under the DSM paradigm. NIMH's move away from the DSM is motivated by the unreliability of the diagnostic categories, and endorses an evidence base built around symptoms, described by neuroimaging, neurobiology and genetics. The new paradigm doubles down on scientific objectivity, formulating pathologies in terms of symptoms with objective laboratory measures. Instead of seizing the opportunity to reformulate psychiatric knowledge through the assembly and composition of a wider range of stakeholders, psychiatry is on track to define mental wellness and illness exclusively in terms that can be measured in a laboratory. This materialist reduction completely disregards the socio-cultural context, as well as the experiential perspectives and expertise that are not represented by seemingly objective measurements. The value judgments that continue to underlie the acceptance of different ranges of human experience are masked by the appeal to measurable evidence.\
\
This focus on measurable symptoms, many of which are correlated with crisis but alone are not enough for a diagnosis, is even more amenable to algorithmic monitoring and predictive profiling. A recent study currently underway in Australia illustrates this trend. The study, called "Facebook use in affective disorders" is a collaboration between researchers from the Monash Alfred Psychiatry Centre and computer scientists from the School of Intelligent Systems at RMIT University. (The FAD Study, 2014) A central question motivating the study is to find out if the onset of manic episodes can be predicted by changes in Facebook use. After encountering anecdotal accounts of dramatic changes in Facebook usage around episodes, the researchers designed this study. They are not analyzing the contents of participants' postings. They are recording the date and time of user activity where activity is defined as a comment, a like, a post, an upload or a message. Participants also self-report their moods to researchers daily, and also indicate historical date ranges for previous manic episodes to establish baselines of activity. The results of this study have not yet been published, and the study does not recommend actionable interventions based on these findings.\
\
During my field work with The Icarus Project I encountered many situations where social media was used to monitor and judge people's mental states. In some instances, social media played a wide a role in diagnoses and forced treatment. One friend of mine described how his mother had printed out his status updates and brought them to his doctor to argue he should be institutionalized. The conspiratorial status updates were unthreatening, but were out of character and were construed as bizarre. He was involuntarily committed, and his social media updates combined with his Mother's concern were surely a factor in his psychatrist's judgment. Other stories I have heard were related to people expressing sadness and despair, scaring their friends and loved ones. In another specific instance a friend shared disappointing news on Facebook, and although she did not threaten herself, another friend called the suicide hotline after jumping to the conclusion she was suicidal. Instead of reaching out to support her directly, her friend intervened based on a status update. Unleashing predictive algorithms on these behavioral data sets threatens to expand the diagnostic gaze even wider and exposes many populations to widespread abuse through new forms of control.\
}