{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #\\#alternatives#\
\
The most important undertaking for the movement right now is the creation of positive alternatives. Without these alternatives, even well intentioned authorities have little recourse when faced with personal crisis. Establishing projects and programs that embody the values and priorities of the movement will help advance the agenda through demonstration and performative critique.\
\
Numerous leaders in the mental health reform movement have called for a focus on the creation of these alternatives. One of the movement's most important peer-organized national conferences is simply called "Alternatives." This conference has run yearly since 1985 and explores support and treatment models beyond the mainstream. (Zinman, 2009) Alternatives is sponsored by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), a federal agency founded in 1992 to advance the behavioral health of the nation.\
\
The Icarus Project, a long time participant in the Alternatives conference, represents an attempt to seed these kinds of alternatives, and their membership and media continue to play a central role in fertilizing other organizations and initiatives. New therapeutic paradigms such as the Open Dialogue Approach, a crisis intervention technique pioneered in Finland, show great promise for transforming these interventions, as well as ongoing therapy (
\f1\fs24 Olson, Seikkula, & Ziedonis, 2014)
\f0\fs28 . The Open Dialogue approach is a holistic technique that locates pathology in the network of social relationships, rather than any one person's head. The therapeutic technique has its roots in schools of family therapy and multidisciplinary crisis intervention teams and invites the person's social network into dialog seeking to create psychological meaning out of symptoms and experiences. Open Dialogue emphasizes flexibility and focuses on promoting dialog. In contrast to many forms of family therapy it encourages "being with" rather than "doing to" and for therapists to "actively listen" rather than interview. The outcomes reported in Finland are extremely positive and the ideas have been spreading quickly in the US and beyond. (Intervoice, 2013) \
\
New approaches for avoiding hospitalization are also emerging and gaining some tenuous traction. In 2012, SAMHSA funded an innovative project in New York City designed to help reduce incidents of forced hospitalization. The Parachute project runs a series of respite houses that provide services for people in crisis. Prospective guests can apply for up to 14 days of free accommodations once a mental health professional provides a letter that they are not a threat to themselves or others. With locations in four out of five of New York City boroughs, the Parachute facilities are run by peers, practice harm reduction approaches to substance abuse, do not forcibly medicate, restrain or seclude, and residents can come and go as they please. Parachute also supports a support line and a mobile intervention team that arrives at the site of a crisis and is trained to diffuse it using an open dialogue approach. During its initial three year pilot, Parachute's outreach was limited, targeting social workers and mental health advocacy groups. The project publishes brochures, runs a website, and manages a 24-hour support line, and awareness of the program mostly travels through word of mouth. The three year pilot has just received approval to begin accepting Medicaid, which will allow it to continue operating beyond the period of its seed grant. It is unclear if the respite model can scale beyond a few dozen beds, but early indicators suggest that the program has been very successful at helping the participants who have been lucky enough to be aware of it avoid hospitalization, at a greatly reduced cost.\
\
SAMHSA has faced harsh criticism for creating inclusive spaces for dialogue and for their sponsorship of peer-run community programs and patient advocacy groups. In the wake of the Sandy Hook shootings in 2013, SAMHSA came under attack and was called to testify at a series of hearings before the House Oversight and Investigations subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce Committee to justify their funding priorities. (Earley, 2013; Examining SAMHSA's role in delivering services to the severely mentally ill, 2013) The chairman of the committee, Congressman Tim Murphy (R, PA), is also a clinical psychologist who also serves in the Naval reserves and works with service members suffering from PTSD. In his opening statements at the May 22, 2013 hearing, Murphy remarked: "the committee has seen substantial evidence that too many of these grants are directed to advancing services rooted in unproven social theory and feel-good fads, rather than science\'85 we expect SAMHSA's work to be firmly rooted in evidence-based practices, enduring high-level scientific peer review at the hands of licensed mental health professionals." (Examining SAMHSA's role in delivering services to the severely mentally ill, 2013) He critiqued the organization for sponsoring the Alternatives conference by referencing a mind/body fitness session with questionable scientific merit, and for providing grant funding to groups that are hostile to the sciences of psychiatry and psychology, question diagnostic labels, and provide advice about coming off of psychiatric medication. During the hearing SAMHSA was challenged for having only four full-time psychiatrists on their staff of 534, and for lacking a policy mandating that their grant reviewers were lacking scientific credentials versus "just experience". SAMHSA would likely benefit from more clinical and research psychiatrists on staff, to increase their credibility as well as integrate more perspectives from across the divide. This current breakdown serves to reinforce the divisions between different constituencies of mental health professionals.\
\
Neither the congressional subcommittee or SAMHSA explicitly discussed what kinds of evidence would constitute support for continued funding of alternative approaches, although divergent assumptions about what constitutes valid evidence was an implicit tension underlying this hearing. This tension extended beyond alternative approaches to healing, and encompassed the very methods for evaluating these approaches, and the means for resolving conflicts when people disagreed on their effectiveness. Murphy's perspective assumes medical experts collecting quantifiable variables is the best way to objectively measure efficacy. Other committee members, and some of SAMHSA's constituents believe that efficacy cannot be objectively measured, and that the qualitative stories of people receiving these interventions need to be considered alongside quantitative methods. This divide is visible in many other areas of policy and research, and it is important to recognize this standoff as an instance of a wider disagreement over what evidence counts, not just a disagreement over how to best support the mentally ill.\
\
The SAMHSA administrator Pamela Hyde responded defensively to the committee's allegations. She explained that SAMHSA awards grants to projects, not organizations, and the projects funded aligned with SAMHSA's mission even if the grantee's overall mission did not. She claimed SAMHSA did not review each session at the conference and was unaware of their contents. She also pointed out that psychiatrists command higher salaries than SAMHSA can afford, and that the kinds of services SAMHSA sponsors are within the expertise of social workers. Instead of overtly defending the support and inclusion of alternative voices and treatment initiatives, Hyde's responses were timid and evasive. She relied on Congresswoman Diana DeGetten's (D, CO) questions to remind the committee that SAMHSA was mandated by congress to support patient advocacy groups, and that congress set SAMHSA's priorities and mandated the percentage of their budget to apply to substance abuse versus serious mental illness. Hyde avoided taking a strong stand for SAMHSA's inclusive policies, perhaps in reaction to the committee's hostility, as they seemed intent on challenging her agency's mandate.\
\
This hearing clearly demonstrates the stakes of credibility. The legitimacy of lived experience is repeatedly questioned, denying the very possibility for gathering evidence to support voices from outside mainstream psychiatry. In her opening statement, ranking Congresswoman DeGetten remarked on a glaring omission in the hearing's testimony:\
\
>Now, I just want to raise one concern about these hearings. This is the third proceeding on mental health, and for the third time we don't have a witness appearing to provide the perspective of people who are living with mental illness. We discussed this the other day. We keep talking about issues that affect their daily lives. We keep having providers and family members and others coming in to talk about people with mental illness but we haven't had people who have mental illness directly talk to us, and I think there are people who would be willing to come forward and talk about their concerns and their issues, which of these SAMHSA programs work for them, which of them don't work for them. What about the privacy provisions and what about the everything, the funding and everything? So I am hoping in our next hearing we could have a panel of people who have mental illness to talk about from their perspective what works and doesn't work. (2013)\
\
To the best of my knowledge, witnesses living with mental illness were never called to testify.\
\
The outcome of these hearings was the drafting of the Helping Families In Mental Health Crisis Act, also known as the Murphy bill. H.R.3717 was introduced in December 2013, but was never enacted. Murphy plans to reintroduce the bill in 2015. The bill includes provisions to gut SAMHSA's funding and power by redirecting funds to the NIMH and through the creation of a new office in the Department of Health and Human Services. The bill also legalizes "assisted outpatient treatment" (AOT), which is a euphemism for forced treatment in outpatient settings. The AOT measures helped mobilize many patient and civil rights advocacy groups to speak out against the bill.\
\
At its heart, the bill was crafted under the erroneous assumption that mental illness causes violence. Studies have repeatedly shown that the occurrence of violence amongst the mentally ill matches the rates of violence in the general population, and that the mentally ill are more likely to be the victims of crimes than the perpetrators (
\fs26 Metzl, & MacLeish, 2015)
\fs28 . Increased mental illness screenings and forced preventative care will not lead to a reduction in violent crimes. What the investigations behind this bill also betray is the central contention of this dissertation\'97mental health activists need to demand a legitimate voice in their support and treatment. Their voices are systematically marginalized and dismissed despite the practical value of their techniques and approaches.\
\
Many of the ideas and proposals have been articulated and piloted. What remains is their adoption. Alternative voices with relevant expertise have been speaking up for decades. We just need to start listening to them.\
\
}