{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Conclusion#\
\
In 1998 the American Legacy Foundation (ALF) was established as a part of the settlement agreement between the states and the tobacco industry. ALF is the largest non-profit public health organization in the US and is dedicated to tobacco control. The organization funds campaigns and educational initiatives to help reduce smoking and counters the marketing engine of the tobacco industry. The tobacco industry betrayed everyone's trust with decades of toxic cover ups and lies, and this record-setting, landmark settlement included the establishment of an independent non-profit that would counter their marketing and advertising through education and outreach. In effect, ALF speaks for the smokers and their families, and has launched incredibly successful campaigns around awareness and cessation.\
\
The mad movement would benefit greatly from a similar organization, and the parallels between Big Tobacco and Big Pharma are striking. The pharmaceutical industry has betrayed the Hippocratic oath to do no harm, and has also perpetrated decades of toxic cover ups and lies. The scandals and lawsuits around anti-psychotics and anti-depressants may yield settlements that rivals the settlement with the tobacco industry, and when that day arrives the movement should be ready with an implementation plan for the kinds of campaigns and educational programming it would sponsor. There is a desperate need for education and marketing around psychiatric diagnosis and treatment that is not sponsored by the pharmaceutical companies, according to alternative frames and narratives.\
\
The central problematic we grappled with in this dissertation is how mad folk can assert their voices when their own identity renders them irrational, categorically excluded from all discourse. At the heart of these issues, it remains peculiar and unjust that a very small group of mostly white, middle-aged men with degrees in medicine (Lewis, 2006) are deciding the criteria for a normal range of human experience. We witnessed the systemic marginalizing and silencing of people with lived psychiatric experience among some of the most progressive groups of professionals at Occupy Wall Street and the APA's radical caucus. Without question, the attention and respect paid to the non-credentialed only gets worse outside these circles.\
\
We also explored the history and culture of the Icarus Project, synthesizing an answer to the question\'97what did they just say? After a dozen years of organizing, the membership of The Icarus Project said many things, some directly, some implied. One powerful theme that emerges from their advocacy is simple, yet immensely powerful. The organizing principle most visible in this examination is the repeated assertion of the demand \'96 "Nothing about us, without us". This finding is at once, both subtle and stark. While this principle may seem innocuous, a deep realization of this goal would go a long way towards correcting some of the most egregious over-extensions of psychiatric oppression and control.\
\
Seats at the tables of power are only the precondition for change. Good ideas need to be proposed, heard and acted on. Throughout this project we also heard, loud and clear, the values and principles that mad folks prioritize and the kinds of language and treatments they prefer. Language and labels matter. Stories and identities matter. Cultural competency matters. Basic humility and sensitivity matter. Force and coercion are blatantly unjust, but in many encounters with psychiatry trust is violated long before these lines are crossed. Patronizing attitudes, self-assured certainty and unchecked arrogance run rampant in clinical settings, percolating through the system and running through research agendas and advertising campaigns alike.\
\
These attitudes run deep in our epistemic culture, and cut to the heart many practical standoffs around what's knowable and how we go about knowing. Congressman Murphy's insistence on "evidence-based" research is code for a certain kind of research\'97namely quantitative data, backed by objective scientific methods. Ethnographies are struggling for recognition and validity across a range of disciplines, including psychology, public policy and political science, and represent one way that the voices can be represented, albeit through the medium of a researcher. These fields continue to be dominated by quantitative methods, which provide important knowledge, but must be tempered and balanced with the textured context of qualitative methods for a fuller comprehension of any social phenomena. A strong embrace of "Nothing about us, without us" includes adjustments to our current standards of knowledge production. Ethnographies of psychiatry such as Luhrmann's _Of Two Minds_ (2001) and patient experience such as Martin's _Bipolar Expeditions: Mania and Depression in American Culture_ are two examples of anthropological contributions to the field. The designer asylum art project represents yet another model of direct participation in the creation of solutions and meaning. The burgeoning "quantified self" movement may represent yet another avenue for developing a deeper understanding of what helps. Similar to journaling, but with the potential to collect and correlate many more data streams, some individuals are taking the responsibility to systematically catalog patterns in nutrition, sleep, exercise, stress and medication interactions. I have heard presentations where some patients report curing their own Irritable Bowel Syndrome, managing their blood sugar, and using these techniques as an instrument to promote behavioral change. There are numerous mood tracking applications that may soon be brought to bear on some of these questions of efficacy, incorporating both quantitative and qualitative data, from the perspective of the individual stakeholder. At some point, even the FDA may be forced to consider these data sources alongside formal research studies.\
\
Many viable alternatives to mainstream approaches are being floated and piloted across the country. These alternatives need to be studied using a variety of methods, and nurtured and successful experiments need to be given the resources to scale and flourish.\
\
Evaluation of the efficacy of these alternatives is a challenge, and a range of methods and stakeholders need to be incorporated to make sense of what works for whom. As with other areas of alternative medicine, such as acupuncture, chiropractice, herbalism there is no single solution that works for everyone, yet many of these approaches work very well for some people. It is very difficult to develop an accurate picture of what helps, especially when the approaches defy prevailing paradigms, and do not support existing profit models. Combatting these biases will require open minds and a dedicated effort to listen to people who are suffering\'97patients, their families, c/s/x activists, and the full range of service providers they encounter. Synthesizing these perspectives is a formidable challenge that multiple choice surveys and economic indicators cannot capture alone. Whether someone prefers to treat their psychosis or to cultivate approaches for controlling their dangerous gifts, they need to be given the respect they deserve, as a human being and as a fully empowered partner in their own treatment and care.\
\
In the coming decade, the mad movement will face serious threats as it pursues the elusive dream of liberation. The movement's context is shifting dramatically, and their messages will need to be retargeted and refreshed. By staking their claim on their right to speak and be heard, they will create the platform to surface and shape their concerns. Escaping from the prison of tautological silencing is imperative for all future campaigns. Framing the struggle in terms of the meta-issue of participation and empowerment enables coalitions of activists to stand in solidarity with their mad comrades. Remember, whatever happens next, you are not alone.\
}