{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \\chapter\{Occupy Mental Health: Liberty Park Madness\}\\label\{chapter-three\}\
\
\\cleanchapterquote\{\{\\ldots\}
\fs24 freedom, which only seldom\'97in times of crisis or revolution\'97becomes the direct aim of of political action, is actually the reason that men live together in political organizations at all. Without it, political life as such would be meaningless. The  raison d'\\^etre of politics is freedom, and its field of experience is action.
\fs28 \}\{
\fs24 Hannah Arendt
\fs28 \}\{Some Book\} \
\
When Occupy Wall Street erupted in Zuccotti Park, mental health activists were determined to "occupy mental health," although initially there was little clarity around what this might mean. Many of those involved in mental health activism felt they had important knowledge and skills to contribute to the larger OWS movement. They wanted to talk with protesters and the media about the ways that psychiatry and big pharmaceutical companies contribute to social and economic injustice, and to emphasize the importance of tending to basic needs, such as eating and sleeping well, in order to avoid burning out. They especially want to explore how these two themes are related through the language we use to describe each other's behavior. Would the movement unravel as Occupiers alienated and pathologized each other through what activists call languages of oppression, or would they unite and support each other with languages of compassion?\
\
The OWS movement generally scorned turning to the criminal justice system to resolve conflicts, but there was no such consensus when it came to dealing with emotional crises and behaviors. Around the country reports began to surface of protesters being forcibly hospitalized and medicated, and many on the ground were desperate for training and educational materials that offered alternative perspectives towards handling emotional trauma and navigating crises. Even among the most progressive circles of activists, few were equipped with tools for dealing with these crises beyond the mainstream DSM\'97the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual\'97and the pathologizing gaze of the psychiatric biomedical model.\
\
More and more stories surfaced in the media and in activist circles about protester burnout and emotional crisis at the occupations. Given the exacerbating conditions\'97lack of sleep, poor nutrition, exposure to the elements, topped off with violence and police brutality\'97it is unsurprising there were many frayed edges amongst the protesters. Many of Zuccotti activists lacked local support systems since they had travelled to New York City, or were displaced, homeless or otherwise struggling with their basic needs. Stress and trauma precipitated a range of emotional reactions and differences in the protester's mental states became the subject of misunderstandings and conflicts. Many protesters also brought their own emotional baggage with them to Zuccotti, and the community struggled to integrate neurological and behavioral diversity.\
\
In Fall 2011 I conducted three months of field-work around mental health issues and Occupy. On one of my first nights in Zuccotti Park I met a young woman from the Pacific Northwest who picking up trash around the camp and learned that she was part of the "Sanitation" working group. I was impressed by her commitment to support the protest through the humble backstage labor of keeping the camp clean. A great deal of the media coverage of OWS focused on the outward messages that the movement communicated to the external world, but during the time I spent around the protests I learned about all the activity devoted to sustaining the physical and emotional well-being of the camp and its inhabitants.\
\
I began participating in some of the New York City working groups who were devoted to supporting the safety and welfare of the protesters. Many of the radical mental health activists I knew believed strongly that the people involved in these efforts would be very receptive to their language and ideas, and were an important constituency for cultivating alliances. Some of the volunteers in these working groups were already sympathetic with the radical mental health movement while others were relatively new to their message. I was genuinely surprised at the resistance that radical mental health activists encountered from some of the mental health professionals working with OWS. The disability rights mantra "Nothing about us without us" may seem like an innocuous proposition, but my fieldwork helped me understand its radical underpinnings and how difficult it can be to apply this maxim in practice. Ultimately, I witnessed how much easier it is for many to critique various 'isms' (capitalism, consumerism, neoliberalism) and the external world than it is to flip the mirror in order to critique yourself and your own profession.\
\
Together with some of the members of the local New York City "Support" working group, radical mental health activists from around the country began assembling a collaborative guide for activists titled _Mindful Occupation: Rising up without Burning Out_. The book's concept excited radical mental health activists, as well as street medics and mental health professionals involved in OWS working groups. Some wanted to create materials to support teach-ins and workshops, and others found the work itself to be liberating and therapeutic. We also saw the publication as a device for provoking important conversations about community, peer-support and mutual aid.\
\
Many heated debates emerged around our work on _Mindful Occupation_, as well as my direct participation in the local 'Support' group. It was through these deliberative processes and exchanges that I rediscovered the promise of Occupy's discursive "public space". These exchanges also revealed the ideological contours and boundaries of different constituencies. The anecdotes and controversies I highlight in this chapter help bring the new wave of psychiatric resistance into sharper focus by exposing the entrenched biases of the mental health establishment. These biases are so entrenched that they surfaced among some of the most liberal and progressive voices of the establishment\'97the mental health professionals involved in volunteering and protesting at Occupy Wall Street. The encounters also revealed some of the entrenched biases among the radical mental health activists, and forced them to confront pragmatic realities around mental health, substance abuse, and the community's capacity to provide the kind of the support they yearned for. Occupy Wall Street became a site where these opposing biases confronted each other face-to-face, where ideology met pragmatic necessity through the labor of on the ground support.\
}