{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #owsmentalhealth: Emotional First Aid#\
\
While most of the media coverage around Occupy Wall Street emphasized the protestors' message to the external world, a significant amount of energy and attention at Zuccotti park was focused inwards, in the forms of capacity-building, skill-sharing, and maintaining the health and safety of the protestors (Gitlin, 2012; Graeber, 2013; Mushett, 2013). A complex network of working groups formed in anticipation and response to the perceived needs of the group. Working groups formed to address physical needs such as food, waste removal, housing, and park planning. Safety, security and health were also primary areas of concern, and many of the working groups involved in these efforts coordinated their work under the umbrella of the "safety cluster" and the Medic groups.\
\
A West Coast activist in his late twenties travelled to New York specifically to volunteer his emergency medicine skills to OWS, and joined the Medic group. He was familiar with The Icarus Project (see Chapter 5) from his encounter with _Friends Make the Best Medicine_, a popular zine published by Icarus in 2007. He personally reached out to the New York City Icarus chapter, inviting them to participate in the Safety Cluster meetings. He was concerned about the tone and direction he had observed in some of the Safety Cluster meetings, and requested supporting materials and allies that could provide alternative perspectives. He did not communicate his specific concerns in detail, perhaps challenged to articulate his vague sense of unease without a richer language to express his critique\'97a language and perspective he hoped that Icarus activists would bring to the meetings.\
\
The "Safety Cluster" was an assembly of working groups that included people committed to mediation, non-violent communication, security and deescalation, as well as people committed to anti-oppression and reducing sexual harassment, who formed the "Safer Spaces" working group. Additionally, there was a working group calling itself "Support" that was operating as a subgroup of the "Medic" working group. The Support group was comprised primarily of mental health professionals --- social workers, chaplains, psychiatrists, and a few non-traditional emotional support practitioners. Together, the safety cluster developed protocols for handling interpersonal conflicts in the park, and organized nightly "community watch" shifts, where members of the community organized to support protesters, and identify and defuse conflict. The Support group quickly assembled and distributed literature, where they described themselves as follows:\
\
>We're a group of people providing mental health and emotional support at Occupy Wall Street. Some of us have formal training and others of us have lived experience, including peers and regular folks who just know a thing or two about how to support themselves and each other when things feel rough. We are a subgroup of the Medical Working Group. (Supporter05, 2011a).\
\
They identified these issues that protestors were facing:\
\
>We're seeing issues like post-traumatic stress, depression, anxiety, altered states, anger, and other things that understandably can come up when you're sleeping outside and surrounded by police. Some might have issues related to drug or alcohol use, including staying sober while at the occupation. Folks are experiencing emotional distress related to social stigma/oppression, including people facing homelessness, LGBTQ people, people of color, people with disabilities and women, especially transgender women. (Supporter05, 2011a)\
\
The support group quickly coordinated its efforts through a mailing list coupled with a Google Spreadsheet. They began organizing community patrols consisting of a pair of Support volunteers walking through the park for 3-hour shifts between 6pm and 3am. During these shifts the Support volunteers wore orange armbands fashioned with a red heart made of duct tape. Shifts began at the medical tent, where the Support team would check in with the medics and other Support volunteers. A red log book for recording serious and ongoing issues was kept in the medic tent. Only first names were recorded in this log book, and illegal behavior was not supposed to be recorded. The community patrol team was then encouraged to make the rounds within the camp and among the working group meeting areas, walking around and checking-in where appropriate.\
\
Many encounters focused on assisting people with their basic needs, such as finding a blanket, helping them calm their anxiety, and offering support to people who were struggling, especially after a conflict with another protester or the police. Some of the protesters would seek out the Support volunteers to discuss emotional issues or social services. Others might come to the medical tent "looking for someone to deal with a perceived physical issue (ie, breathlessness, feeling cold, believing that they have a rash/bugs/etc.) but it turns out to be emotional (ie, panic attack, altered state/perception)." Support was also part of the team that was called into deal with crises that had a mental health component, such as altered states, delusions or self-harm.\
\
The community patrols began operating soon after the occupation's establishment, on September 18th 2011, and ran all the way through the protesters' eviction on November 15th. For almost two full months the Support working group successfully organized pairs of volunteers to patrol Zuccotti park, nine hours a night, seven nights a week. Most of the volunteers had full-time jobs, and insuring the continuity of the patrols was a significant undertaking. Some of the volunteers signed up for a one patrol a week, but a few of the core participants in the Support working group did multiple patrols a week, in addition to regular organizer meetings and trainings. There were approximately 35-50 people participating in the community patrols. Since participation was fluid, and protesters within the Safety cluster often participated in more than one working group, it is difficult to determine the precise size of the Support group.\
\
In addition to the community patrols, the Support working group convened weekly meetings, hosted trainings in order to orient volunteers on patrol procedures and Zuccotti security and deescalation protocols, and actively participated in many other working groups' meetings, including other groups in the safety cluster, the medic groups, and the general assembly. They also helped organize "Jail Support", where members of the Support group would meet arrested protesters upon their release. The support groups' mailing list was hosted on the Mayfirst.org's listserv, a long-time activist-friendly Internet Service Provider that provided free hosting to OWS working groups. The mailing list was very active throughout the occupation, providing a space for tactical as well as strategic planning.\
\
From the outset the Support group struggled to negotiate a balance between theory and practice as practitioners from a diverse range of backgrounds came together for the purpose of supporting the overtly political OWS protest. As a part of a FAQ describing the group's identity and mission, the Support group organizers drafted the following statement:\
\
>Bring anti-oppression work into your practice: be aware of your own privileges (ie, race, class, having some place to sleep, or anything else) and how that may impact the people you are working with and their impression of who you are and what you're there to do. Some examples include: people of color have a long history of experiencing oppression from white social workers; people with mental health histories may have been traumatized by engagement with psych hospitals; or, LGBTQ people may have had their identities pathologized by mental health professionals. Practice cultural humility by checking your own identity-based assumptions. Seek to listen to people's experiences from a place of openness and non-judgment, and help people to meet their needs as they define them for themselves rather than your own idea of what might be best. Also, try to coordinate responding to any incidents related to racism, homophobia, transphobia, sexism, etc. with the Safer Spaces [working group]. (Supporter05, 2011b)\
\
Unsurprisingly, this collective statement of group identity generated some controversy. Some within the group wanted to elaborate on the oppressive features of the mental health system, and work to avoid them:\
\
>Supporter01: "I want to add one more thing: Work/be with the community in way that does not replicate, in any way, the oppressive models or behaviors of the system's social work/services. What do people think?" (2011a)\
\
>Supporter02: "Oppressive models? I think too vague. One persons oppressive model may not be another persons oppressive model." (2011a)\
\
>Supporter01: "I agree with you - it is too vague. Maybe we can give examples... For example, oppressive social work/services patterns: - collecting a lot of information from people, while worker doesn't share information about themselves;- use of professional language/jargon, such as diagnostic/DSM type of words, which may sound offensive or stigmatizing to people. Etc." (2011b)\
\
>Supporter02: "I will yield to the group but personally I have done good and non oppressive work with that model in the right context. The key is ones own sensitivity, starting where the patient is, and knowing what to use when and how. Some people thrive with a non reciprocal opportunity to talk and are put off by a support person's self disclosure. Some find diagnoses and medicines a liberating relief. I think we should remain flexible on modalities with this work in progress." (2011b)\
\
A recurring theme surfaced around the appropriateness of this forum for critiquing language and the system versus focusing on the day-to-day practice of supporting the protesters:\
\
>Supporter03: "Let's not use this as the forum to critique our various disciplines but rather as a place to create something beautiful, with the hopes that our efforts will help to lead the systemic changes that are needed. I don't think this is the forum to debate diagnoses, disclosure etc. My understanding is that we are gathering to offer our unique experience and expertise to those who need our assistance. Let's focus on how we'll go about doing that and table these other challenges for the time being." (2011)\
\
The question of critical engagement continued to surface, and some suggested spinning off a separate sub-group for more in-depth discussions:\
\
>Supporter04: "In addition, I propose that people who are passionate about creating a more in depth discussion about who we are and deal with some of the more nuanced dilemmas we are facing, would create a sub-working group for that. Also, concerns have been raised about the way we conduct our meetings, therefore I propose that we get more familiar with decision making, common meeting rules, and consensus process, as one possible way in which we handle our meetings as well as conflict." (2011)\
\
The pressure to support the protesters created an understandable tension between tactical problem-solving and carving out a discursive space for reflection and critique. However, the proposal to spin-off a sub-group for critical discussions was interpreted by some of the participants as a way to marginalize or even dismiss difficult and controversial perspectives. At the heart of this disagreement were differing perspectives on the nature and goals of the OWS protest, layered on top of long-time controversies around the effectiveness of mainstream models of support. Some saw OWS as a platform for protesting inequality and the socio-economic system. Others took a more expansive view, and expressed their protest by prefiguratively modeling and enacting the kind of society they wished to inhabit. The Support group was caught in the middle, as many of the participants in the group were attempting to support the protesters using instruments and tools that were also implicated in perpetuating the inequalities that constituted OWS's core concerns. Many in the group were acutely aware that certain support models could replicate the same power relations that OWS was resisting.\
}