{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Joie de Vivre##\
\
In the early morning on Saturday, October 22nd Dylan Spoelstra, a 24 year-old Canadian OWS protester, scaled Zuccotti Park's "Joie de Vivre", a 70-foot tall, bright red sculpture composed of "open-ended tetrahedrons". Dylan remained on the sculpture for several hours until the police talked him down, handcuffed him, and sent him to Bellevue for a psychiatric evaluation (Baker, 2011). Dylan climbed the statue early in the morning and remained perched on a platform 30 feet above the ground for several hours. He demanded Mayor Bloomberg's resignation, and repeatedly requested a jacket and cigarettes throughout his dialogues with the Police Department's hostage negotiation unit. According to the police, "[h]e was not arrested, he did not get a summons, he'll just be evaluated psychologically." Dylan was subsequently committed to Bellevue's psychiatric unit, where he spent over 2 weeks as a psychiatric inpatient.\
\
This incident sent waves through the support group, since this was precisely the kind of situation they wanted to intervene in, to handle with more gentleness and compassion than the NYPD. Supporter02 wrote:\
\
>Dear OWS support, I was at Zuccotti Park on Thursday at 6:30 pm for the first time and in my first five minutes had met the young man who climbed the sculpture on Saturday morning. Before he ran off, It was clear to me as I spoke with him that he was extremely psychotic, manic, and suffering and it was also clear to me that he could likely be helped in a relatively short period of time in a way that would not have involved danger, handcuffs, and press. By the time I left at 11:30, I was too troubled by my experience with Support to return. I felt that the current structure was unsafe for volunteers and occupiers and I could not ethically participate in it as Support; nor could I engage in the time consuming process of organizing, when my goal had been to come in and do what I know how to do, which is to help people like Dylan. (2011c)\
\
It is unclear precisely what treatment alternatives Supporter02 had in mind, or why he/she felt thwarted by the group's consensus process. Supporter02 is an experienced social worker who ran a small social work clinic in the Manhattan. When the support group first formed, Supporter02 offered to bring a psychiatric colleague to the park, and was one of the stronger proponents of the value of the diagnoses and psychiatric medication. He/she also made a case for supporters not disclosing their own personal history to supportees, since in his/her clinical experience some patients preferred to work with counselors operating with detached authority. Though Supporter02 minces his/her words in this email exchange, his/her frustration with the Support group's consensus model is clear.\
\
We are left guessing at his/her's preferred alternative, but given Supporter02's other statements, it is likely that he/she would have steered Dylan to psychiatric support, and attempted to avoid police involvement at all costs. Afterwards, some of the mental health activists in the park that night discussed how they would have preferred to support Dylan by being together with him through his crisis, providing one-on-one, direct support. They conceded that they lacked the capacity to follow through on such an intensive support obligation. Ultimately, there is no clear-cut, correct solution for volatile situations such as Dylan's. While it is easy to second-guess the past, these situations are often chaotic and unpredictable. It is only after they have deteriorated that their impact and potential danger becomes clear. Moreover, for every Dylan, there were many activists in Zuccotti acting erratically whose behavior never escalated to the point inviting police intervention. While everyone in the Support group was against police involvement, attitudes around coercion and forced hospitalization varied widely.\
\
Supporter02 continued to vent her frustration with other participants in the Support working group:\
\
>I had entered the Occupation with humility and a wish to be of service and now I am suggesting that there should be greater humility on the part of all involved with Support. The expertise and years of experience of professionals who have worked on the ground in New York City with the homeless, the mentally ill, with addiction, with gangs, with domestic violence, with the hospital and entitlement systems, needs to be sought out actively and immediately. They are there for the asking. Respect specialization. I would not and could not presume to do anything outside of my ken. There is no time to argue about language or politics on the south side of the Park. Those debates can come later. Assume that anyone offering their service to the Occupation is like minded enough and ask them what they know and how best to proceed. It would be better to err on the side of that deference when addressing issues of immediate health and safety, and not with guiding the course of the movement." (2011c)\
\
While Supporter02 would have most likely arranged a more compassionate intervention for Dylan than he received at the hands of the NYPD, the way he/she asserted his/her authority was triggering to some of the participants in the group. Supporter02 is clear enough in his/her writing to antagonize some, but did not persuade others to adopt his/her suggestions. It is unclear if the vagueness in Supporter02's writing is a function of his/her's frustration, lack of time, or if it was supplemented by face-to-face encounters. Supporter02 may have also constrained some of his/her language out of deference or fear of reprisal by the more radical contingents on the list.\
\
Supporter02's claim that "There is no time to argue about language or politics on the south side of the Park. Those debates can come later." was met by the reaction that "arguing about language and politics is _exactly_ what we are in the Park to do." Supporter02's insistence that the participants "respect specialization" provoked the response that "'specialists' [should] pay reciprocal respect to the experiences of those that they treat. We are all specialists in our own personal experiences, and these experiences need to be respected and validated by those who are trying to help---even if they are acting in good faith, and have the best of intentions." The tensions between the authority of credentialed expertise and experiential expertise were never resolved, and recurred throughout the occupation.\
\
These sentiments were mirrored in face-to-face group meetings, leading to frustration and exacerbation. Some meetings ran so long that there was no time to complete the scheduled agenda, and participants who had waited patiently for over two hours to speak were never given the floor. On the other hand, face-to-face encounters sometimes led to reconciliation, especially in sidebars and personal conversations outside the formal meeting space where participants developed friendships and trust. Supporter05, shouldered an immense amount of responsibility, including organizing shifts, patrolling the park for multiple shifts per week, and facilitating trainings and meetings. His/her superb facilitation skills, dynamic inclusiveness and firm demeanor helped hold the meetings together, but eventually the stress of mediating conflicts became unbearable and Supporter05 suffered extreme burn out, choosing to step back from his/her core organizing role. Supporter05's stepping back closely followed the police raid on Zuccotti, and had the occupation continued, it is unlikely the group had the capacity to sustain the level of services it was providing in the park through the winter.}