{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Is There a Doctor in the House?##\
\
On a crisp autumn evening in early October, I attended an in-person Support-group meeting where a psychiatrist volunteering with the Support group introduced a motion to recruit more psychiatrists to spend time in the park and support the protester's psychiatric needs. The medic who had invited Icarus to OWS was present, in his wide-brimmed hat, along with two young social work students from Hunter College who had signed up for a community patrol that night, and other members of the Support group. The group was sharply divided on this action. Some argued against this recruitment, likening it to recruiting off-duty police officers to assist with security in the camp. They were visibly agitated, and angrily pointed out that psychiatrists have state sanctioned power to forcibly medicate or even institutionalize citizens against their will, and introducing this power dynamic to the community patrols would likely undermine trust. Others rationally countered that some of the protesters were already taking psychiatric medications, and would best be supported by not letting their prescriptions lapse. Also, there were some situations developing in Zuccotti that might benefit from psychiatric treatment, including anxiety, depression, panics, insomnia, and substance abuse. Although their points were largely rational, their tone was interpreted as {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://455BA1AF-3CCC-4E4D-B94E-02C36CA38A82"}}{\fldrslt patronizing and condescending}}.\
\
Strikingly, during this exchange, the psychiatrist present was belligerent and aggressive, dismissing the emotional significance of language and labels, while casually directing accusatory clinical diagnoses at other group members as well as activists. He did not yell, but spoke loudly, gesticulated wildly, and at one point, stood up and physically intimidated someone who disagreed with him. He exhibited an arrogance and lack of reflective awareness that disturbed many in the group, and demonstrated the very behaviors and attitudes that those against recruiting more psychiatrists were concerned about. This attitudinal pattern is common among physicians, especially psychiatrists, as we have already seen in Chapter 2. These outbursts illustrate the need for medicine to adopt what Sayantani DasGupta calls "narrative humility", which she contrasts with medical curriculum's claims of "cultural competence" (DasGupta, 2008). She sharply argues that culture is not something you can "master" in a two-week workshop, and this psychiatrist's display of arrogant overconfidence was disconcerting and undermined trust. The group never succeeded in recruiting other psychiatrists to the park, and physicians associated with the Medical group operated an underground pharmacy, filling psychiatric prescriptions for the protesters.\
\
The Support group acknowledged that they did not all share a common language, although they thought they largely agreed on their mission and goals. The group leadership encouraged the membership to be patient with each other, and give each other the benefit of the doubt.\
\
>Supporter05: And, one thing I'm encountering at many different meetings is that this really is the 99%. We're not all radical, and we're not all radical about everything. We don't all know or agree with the most politically correct or empowering or cutting edge way to talk about things. \\*We also cannot demand that all of those approaches change overnight as a precondition to being able to work together.\\* Meeting people where they're at doesn't just apply to others, it applies to us. This goes for the radical mental health folks but it also goes for the social workers: the radical mental health movement has been working very hard to change the language and culture of how we talk about these issues for a long time. It can be hard to be in a progressive space and hear some terminology that feels contrary to that. (2011c)\
\
The cold, clinical language of psychiatry continued to trigger some of the radical mental health activists, and some members of the "Support" team made an effort to adjust their language after they began to understand its impact and learn some alternatives. Others however, insisted that this language was merely a value-neutral shorthand, jargon for professionals to communicate with each other more efficiently. While the debate about the impact of clinical labels on people's identity has surfaced in numerous other contexts (Davis, 1997; Butler, 2004), the way it surfaced at Occupy Wall Street indicates how much work the mental health activists have ahead of them.\
}