{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Involuntary treatment#\
\
Conversations on the list also returned regularly to the topic of involuntary hospitalization. Supporter07, a chaplain who was working closely with the support group, first emphasized their deference to mental health professionals:\
\
Chaplains although get training in mental health first aid, trauma, counseling and are taught to identify mental disorders and diseases etc. but certainly not treat them it is extremely important in our work as chaplains to call in the licensed professionals to handle as we are not qualified to do so. I do not claim nor am a mental health professional. Partnering with them or MDs, psych classes and my own personal Jungian analysis sessions of the past neither makes me so. (2011).\
\
S/he proceeded to explain his/her understanding of the relationship between the OWS Support group and the NY State mental health policy, as well as his/her understanding of patient rights.\
\
>Having said that the logical part of me does feel that although we are really trying to do the right thing by being on the side of patient advocacy & it is vital that we understand that are not an island devoid of state laws and mental and medical health policy and procedures in New York state. From what I do understand of the laws is that if an MD, PsyD or MSW suggests that a person be admitted to a facility and volunteers they are only in that said facility for a 3 day observation. They are not institutionally "locked" up indefinitely\'85 there is a entire legal process involved to do that involving state legal agencies and it is limited to the criminals.... Although no law or policy is absolutely perfect, to prevent serious risk and/or possible loss, I do think it would be in our best interests to abide by the experience of the seasoned social workers, clinical psychologists and psychiatrists who are well versed in these systems and procedures. I humbly suggest that we set aside any preconceived notion or experience of "the system" to gain benefit from their work. Their experience in their field is vital to the movement. Perhaps what the situation calls for is not to toss the baby out with the bath water but rather to take what already exists and build upon it with out dismissing that which already does work? In other words, shall we work to improve it not abolish it all together? (2011)\
\
Their textbook view of what actually transpires in cases of involuntary hospitalization was vehemently challenged by Supporter08:\
\
>Mental health professionals have been granted state-sanctioned power to forcibly detain (and toxically medicate!) citizens without any due process or legal recourse. 72 hour observation? Bullshit. Depends if you are voluntary or involuntary, and all it takes for someone to lose their constitutional freedoms is one psychiatrist with a wink to another.\
\
>Threat to yourself or to others? Maybe that's how people are admitted, but they won't be discharged until their behavior conforms to the norms as defined by their wardens. Or until their insurance runs out. Whichever comes last.\
\
>How bad can a few days or weeks or months in a psych ward be? Worse than jail? For some. Inpatient hospitalization often inflicts physical and emotional abuse upon patients, with scars, and medical bills, that can last a lifetime. Once hospitalized, many patients are sucked into a revolving door of psychiatric care as their personalities are examined and pathologized under the gaze of the psychiatric magnifying glass. I know /many/ who would prefer to take their chances with the criminal justice system than ever set foot inside of a psychiatric ward again.\
\
>So, let's have a conversation about patient realities, from the subjective experiences of patients, rather than patient rights. Let's respect each others experiences and knowledge, and not ask for license numbers and credentials in order to be admitted to the conversation. (2011)\
\
These claims were corroborated by a social worker with experience working in in-patient facilities:\
\
>Supporter09: i write here to give [Supporter08] support that no matter what the law states, the 72 hour observation period is not part of actual reality, certainly not in the hospitals i've worked in. first of all, patients--even voluntary ones--have to assertively write a 72-hour letter, which then starts the clock, and often the treatment team will indicate it may contest the letter in weekly court unless blah blah, so if the patient wants to hold their own completely they may have to wait until court, possibly seven days after being admitted, for instance.\
\
>Supporter08, i hear your frustration. i think a lot of us are frustrated--for a variety of reasons, or maybe a bunch of similar ones--and feeling belittled (no credentials? no patient experience? no street cred?) really sucks, especially when we're all working so hard and putting so much of our heart into this. i guess all this arguing, or dialoguing, or whatever, probably has to happen at some level because this movement does represent a fundamental shift in practically everything. (2011).\
\
These encounters demonstrated the value of bringing together people from different backgrounds, including those with direct experiences within the psychiatric system. Although concessions and compromises were rarely made in writing, numerous participants in the Support group approached me offline to express the value they found in these exchanges. Although the primary interlocutors rarely gave much ground, many of the lurkers and listeners on the list reported that they learned a great deal about this new wave of radical mental health, and how it differed from the dogmatic straw-man of anti-psychiatry they were familiar with previously. While it is difficult to tell if the presence and participation of the radical mental health activists within this group had a significant impact on its operations, it is clear from the mailing list that they succeeded in problematizing many assumptions that the professionals took for granted.\
\
}