{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #License to Support#\
\
Cracks continued to emerge, along with tensions between the professionals and the peer-supporters. At one point, one of the Support group members strongly proposed that Support members wear armbands displaying their credentials and professional license number:\
\
>Supporter06: "I've been talking with the medical people about a little more elaborate identification system. They have talked to me about problems they've been having with a fringe group 'Icarus' who have been acting at cross purposes with medical when trying to deal with psychotic/dangerous people in the park. According to the medics this group has been "encouraging" crazy behavior... mental health [should have] its own insignia on a sticker and/or big t-shirt that can be worn over outer clothing that identifies the person as an ows/zuccotti park mental health worker and has a number that can be written in. There can be a numbering system such as Sw# (for social workers), Pc# (for pastoral counselors), Psy# (for psychiatrists) The number is key because it means the person has had some \\*vetting and orientation\\*\
\
>All mental health workers can be vetted (ie. Their credentials checked\\*) and be oriented to work in the park. Once this is done they can be given a number to write-in on their t-shirt or sticker. \\*All workers in the park who see mental health workers with no number should refer them to a mental health point person for vetting and orientation\\*. orientation including such things as - Procedure for dealing with psychotic/and or dangerous people in the park - Procedure for signing in and out - where the referral lists are and familiarity with what's on them. - a basic knowledge of the park and neighborhood service. - some idea on the limits of what we can provide vs. refer out. - How to proceed in a dangerous situation." (2011a).\
\
The particular incident that spurred Supporter06 to recommend vetting the Support team was never fully elaborated or substantiated. There were over a dozen activists associated with The Icarus Project who were organizing in Zuccotti, participating in a range of working groups, including the Support group this email was addressed to. Supporter06's description of the "fringe" group Icarus suggests that s/he was unaware there were Icarus Project members participating in the group, or, was intentionally antagonizing them. As we will see in more detail in Chapter 5, The Icarus Project is a loosely structured network without a formal, hierarchical leadership structure. It is unclear if there were any individuals who identified themselves with The Icarus Project who the medics confused with a "group", but there was almost certainly no organized action by The Icarus Project to disrupt the medical tent.\
\
In follow up conversations with the Medical group they explained that they wanted to fully "clear" their patients medically (e.g. physically) before turning them over to the Support group for emotional support. One radical mental health activist countered that in an era dominated by the reductionist biomedical model, all forms emotional distress could be described in medical terms, ceding all authority to the Medical group when it comes to emotional well being. Was a chemical imbalance a physical condition, to be treated under the jurisdiction of the Medics? What is the line between psychical and emotional ailments?\
\
Soon after this exchange I got together for dinner and a drink at a nearby Irish pub with the head of the medical tent, a professional nurse who had shouldered the incredible responsibility of managing the life and death operations of the Medic group. His bandana-wearing golden retriever accompanied him, and he relayed his own personal traumatic experiences with psychiatry, and his overmedication on attention deficit disorder drugs as a teenager. In the course of our conversation it became clear that his impression of all psychiatric resistance conformed to the traditional mold of 1970s anti-psychiatry. His understanding of the radical mental activists was that they were categorically against all psychiatric medications, and did not believe that mental illness existed. He was unsure of which situation Supporter06 was referring to, but was very concerned that the entire medical operation would be held liable, and potentially shut down if it violated NY State standards around psychiatric evaluation and care. He saw the role of the Medic group as supporting OWS within the framework of the existing system, rather than re-imagining all social, medical and psychiatric services. Our conversation left him with a newfound appreciation for the more nuanced critique offered by the new wave of mental health activists, and he agreed to reconsider his extreme stance of wanting to bring in psychiatric authorities when faced with emotionally disturbed patients.\
\
The issue of "vetting and orientation" continued to divide the group. Supporter10 responded to the armband proposal by questioning the underlying biases of the credentialing systems, as well as considering who would be excluded if this standard were enforced:\
\
>In regard to the "vetting and orientation" and the classification of who is qualified to provide what "support" services - this concerns me. I get how we want to have some idea of who is representing "support." I just hope that this doesn't turn into something that is based on "formal expertise" as opposed to informal, because the systems that formally recognize and confer expertise (i.e. licensing bodies, grad schools, etc.) are all inherently racist, classist, and other forms of oppressive. Given that these oppressions are at the root of a lot of the conflicts in the park, I want this group to consciously and purposefully recognize and include informal expertise at providing "support." I know if we went to a system of only recognizing licensed/credentialed experts as being qualified to provide support, that would exclude most of the support volunteers who have experience with issues of homelessness, drug use, radical mental health, and harm reduction (myself included). (2011a).\
\
Supporter06 replied:\
\
>I agree with your larger point that one doesn't need to be credentialed to provide support, However, the problem I have is with people with no mental-heath or medical training setting policy regarding what to do and how to handle people in a psychotic, manic or dangerous episode.\
\
>Even thought Zuccotti park is a somewhat removed microcosm with its own ideals and mores, and they are trying to do things differently in regards to various 'isms' (not too successfully I might add) this does not strike me as a set of qualifications that then makes one able to determine 'best practice' on what to do and how to proceed with someone who is in a state of being a danger to themselves or those around them. Nor does having had an experience of being admitted to a psychiatric ward, or having a friend or relative admitted no matter how unpleasant the experience was. The whole situation of 'support' proceeding along these lines and making up new guidelines in these situations strikes me as dangerous and irresponsible. (2011b).\
\
It is unclear what kind of training Supporter06 had in mind that would not provide credentials, but throughout the exchange s/he refused to demonstrate sensitivity to stigma and labeling, and insisted on dismissing the lived experiences and advice of people who had extensive experiences with the system. In the end, the group never adopted the resolution to wear armbands with identifying professional credentials, although some of the individuals in the group did so on their own.\
\
}