{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Which 99%?#\
\
The questioning of credentials on the Support team was mirrored with a parallel questioning of the credentials of some of the protesters. OWS began as an inclusive movement with the intent of including all who wanted to participate. This principle became challenging to uphold as disruptions swept through the park, especially after the police began directing the homeless and substance abusers to Zuccotti. The Zuccotti Peace council tried to establish a protocol for asking people to leave the park, but the police maintained that, just as the police could not force the protesters to leave the park, OWS could not force anyone to leave either. Supporter02 describes another incident involving a couple who were well known to the Support group, and had been previously asked to leave the park after an incident where they had hit each other:\
\
>Note that on Monday night, both the methadone addict couple and the drunken punk rocker men railed endlessly amidst their noise and threats and chaos about how they were there for the movement and the cause, had been there since day two for that reason, and were not like these other self-entitled freeloaders all around them causing trouble. The language of this distinction is clearly part of the park culture and sadly, something the disease of addiction will readily try to co-opt. (2011d)\
\
Supporter10 responded passionately:\
\
>I don't see how we can know that these claims were co-optation or insincere. Personally if someone told me that my political motivations were invalidated by my substance use, I would experience that as highly condescending and alienating and it wouldn't endear me to them. The fact that people use substances does not take away all of their agency or maturity or opinions. To be sure, it also doesn't excuse threatening or aggressive behavior. I'm really interested in changing the park culture that includes this language of distinction, rather than holding it precious and deciding who is qualified to make that distinction.\
\
>Again, just speaking for myself, but the revolution that I'm interested in participating in is the one that includes everybody and doesn't distinguish between worthy and unworthy protesters. Personally I feel that engaging and including everyone IS affecting systems of change. Some of the work that I'm doing with homeless/young/drug-using/gang-involved/etc. occupiers is exactly that. Talking to them about why they're there. And I don't mean challenging them, I mean listening to them\'85\
\
>Also, many people experience "addict" as a pretty stigmatizing label, especially when applied externally by someone else. Personally I don't use it unless the person I'm speaking with has self-identified that way. (2011a).\
\
The issue of who was a legitimate protester, like the issue of who was a legitimate Supporter, was contentious and fraught. These issues provoked difficult questions about the identity and mission of the movement, and it is not surprising that within the Support group there were differing opinions around the value of inclusivity. Some felt strongly that the movement needed to accomplish specific political objectives, and that the protesters' activities should be organized according to these objectives. Others felt strongly that the work of creating an alternative society within the encampment was inherently political, and should not only be viewed instrumentally, as a means to an end. Rather, the creation of this alternative society was an end in itself, as well as a powerful performative expression of the group's principles. A policy of radical inclusion, even where it created some discomfort, was a strong political statement that defied the status quo, embodied the values the movement sought to advance, and was one way to effect change. The Support group often found itself in the crossfire of this conflict, mediating volatile conflicts and attempting to diffuse tensions before they erupted.\
\
}