{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Coda: Post-Zuccotti Shelter and Support##\
\
Following the NYPD's violent eviction from Zuccotti park at 1am on November 15th, a few homeless shelters and churches opened their doors to the protesters. Many Zuccotti occupiers had come from out of town to the protests and needed shelter during New York's cold winter months. The Support group was pivotal in negotiating these arrangements, and essential in helping sustain these shelters in the months that followed. Conflicts between shelter dwellers and between the protesters and the shelter providers were more complex and difficult to manage than in the park. The Support group reverted to a more traditional model of support, as the shelter arrangement closely resembled typical settings where social worker normally practiced. The group worked to provide information about government services, helped people secure food, clothing, and healthcare, and mediated conflicts with the shelter providers. The shelter organizers struggled to keep the peace, and many of the shelters formed their own governing structures. A few of the shelter organizers specifically asked the Support group to step back, as they felt that the Support members were more harmful than helpful. Overall, once the role of the Support group shifted to offering more traditional forms of Social Work support, the conversations around alternative mental health largely faded. While there was still plenty of urgency around engaging and questioning mainstream paradigms of mental health diagnosis and treatment, the occupation at Zuccotti helped foster the unique conditions for discussing these issues, in situ.\
}