{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Rising Up Without Burning Out#\
\
Alongside my participation in the OWS Support group, I was simultaneously involved in a complementary project aimed at compiling, remixing and authoring materials aimed to support protesters and caregivers struggling with emotional crisis within the context of Occupy. The idea of working on this book excited radical mental health activists from around the country, as well as street medics and mental health professionals involved in Occupy working groups. Some wanted to create materials to support teach-ins and workshops, and others found the work itself to be liberating, defiant, and therapeutic. We also saw the publication as a device for provoking important conversations about community, peer-support and mutual aid.\
\
I trace this project's inception to a number of other projects I had recently worked on which anticipated this publication. First, the summer preceding OWS I consulted with The Icarus Project on re-releasing new editions of their existing catalog of self-published books. We were trying to reimagine zine distribution for the 21\\textsuperscript\{st\} century through on-demand publishing and the release of the "source" files behind their publications to enable remixing and repurposing. Although the Icarus publications were already available under Creative Commons licensing, only the derivative, print-ready PDFs were distributed and not the underlying assets and layout files. The original source files were authored using Adobe's Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign applications, and were then rendered to the publishable PDFs. Reworking the PDFs is very difficult without these original source files, and this meant that remixing the materials for other purposes was legally permissible, but practically difficult. Second, I had also recently worked with the booki platform (later renamed BookType), an open-source wiki that is designed to create print-ready PDFs, as well as ebooks in a range of digital formats (Sourcefabric, n.d.). I was aware that this tool had been used to support "book sprints," in which teams would author a book in as little as a week. I myself had remotely contributed a chapter to _Collaborative Futures,_ a book whose first edition was authored by five collaborators who locked themselves in a hotel room starting with nothing but the title, and emerged a week later with a complete first draft (Zer-Aviv et al., 2010). The _Mindful Occupation_ project took longer than a week to assemble, but the inspiration came directly from prior booki projects, such as _Collaborative Futures_ and _How to Bypass Internet Censorship_ (FLOSS Manual Contributors, 2014). Finally, a friend of mine involved in OWS had recently launched a Kickstarter campaign for the creation and publication of _The 99%'s Guide,_ and I was inspired by this project to attempt something similar around mental health and Occupy (Mushett, Shah & Tang, 2011).\
\
All of the labor on this project was completely voluntary, from the cover art, to the layout, to the mindfuloccupation.org website and the fundraising video. We also made extensive use of prior materials that had been released under Creative Commons licenses. Since print remains an important medium of distribution and dissemination, we set up a Kickstarter project to help fund our print run and raised over $3,000. We released a draft version of the hard copy in time for May Day 2012 and the May 5 occupation of the American Psychiatric Association conference in Philadelphia that I write about in the next chapter. The book was picked up for distribution by AK Press, an anarchist-friendly publisher and distributor, and to date has sold hundreds of copies.\
\
The book brings together materials on emotional first aid, navigating crises, preventing and healing sexual assault, as well as facilitating peer-support groups and coping with stress. Many of the preexisting materials needed to be re-contextualized. For example, we would find a great resource within a PDF alongside material less relevant to Occupy. We did a lot of re-mixing and matching. When revisiting some older materials, we also found that some of it had aged poorly, and we {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://6778B811-7946-4D66-B554-7DEA86676F68"}}{\fldrslt reworked these}} portions with revised sensibilities. We also authored a great deal of original content, including the introduction, sections explaining radical mental health, and an effort to connect corruption in psychiatry and pharma directly to the core concerns of Occupy. We intended these sections to stimulate more discussion, analysis and action.\
\
}