{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Cacophonous Choruses##\
\
By design, we selected a wiki-like platform to assemble and author the book. Anyone involved in the project could add or edit material online, and the system preserved the history of all our edits. We also set up a mailing list alongside the booki platform for planning logistics, developing content, and working through conflicts. The project attracted a diverse range of participants from a variety of backgrounds, all listed in the credits of the publication and on the website (Imai et al., 2012, p. 77). The project mailing list included over 40 contributors, the Kickstarter project attracted close to 80 supporters, and dozens of others contributed their skills, talent, and time to help produce this publication. Participants included mental health professionals, some of whom were involved with the Support group, long-time radical mental health activists, graduate students, and occupiers interested in mental health.\
\
The project attracted contributors with varying perspectives and agendas. One of the key contributors, Contributor01, was a social worker and long time Icarus organizer. On October 12th, he composed the following announcement, and circulated it within relevant communities:\
\
>The idea has come up to group-author a book/zine about mental health in direct action/protest situations that can be quickly compiled, printed and distributed at the occupy events around the country\'85. If you want, please join in the authoring or reach out to others you know who might be able to help out, if you don't have time/energy to write anything, please please at least send on any topics/questions/concerns you hope could be addressed.\
\
We quickly assembled a working title, _Mental Health and Activism: A guide to protesting sanely in a world gone mad_ (later renamed _Mindful Occupation: Rising up without burning out_)_,_ and a tentative outline, including possible chapters such as: "1) _What is radical mental health?_ Overview of radical mental health, critique of psychiatry, brief history of critical movements, why important; 2) _Rising up without burning out_ self care, harm reduction, care for others, etc); 3) _Psychological First Aid for everyone_ maybe separate chapter geared towards medics specifically?; 4) _Mental and Emotional Health at an Action Clinic_ how to get providers on board, things to think about, supplies needed, etc; 5) _Just because you're paranoid doesn't mean they aren't out to get you_ Special notes about dealing with mental health and the police state including how to care for people in jail, coming out of jail, how to keep paranoia in check, queer and trans legal support issues, etc,; 6) _Appendixes_; 7) _Materials List_; 8) _Resource List_; 9) _Books/Websites to Read_". This outline set the tone and direction for the project, and provided people interested in contributing with a clearer sense of the project's intent.\
\
In addition to the tentative outline, Contributor01 also posed some guiding questions they thought we should grapple with:\
\
>Some open questions: Someone is talking about killing themselves at the encampment, what do I do? (already happened in Mpls, and a probable suicide in San Diego) Someone is freaking out, what do I do? (Or why you shouldn't call the cops to deal with someone who is freaking out.) Dealing with trauma during/after an action or police brutality Having a self-care plan - also the movement doesn't need any heroes or martyrs Having some people with discreet access to marijuana and/or benzos to deal with extreme panic (good idea or bad idea) - general concerns about having RX drugs around in an action clinic, etc.\
\
Initially, the group hoped to rapidly assemble relevant materials for publication, and quickly raise funds to print and distribute them where they were most needed. We quickly identified some great existing resources, such as the Activist Trauma Support site (Activist Trauma Support, n.d.) and Will Hall's First Aid for Emotional Trauma (2008), and obtained permission from the authors to republish their material. The author of a recent zine entitled _Stress, Anger, Depression, Anxiety: a Coping Skills Zine_ also joined the effort (Contributor08), and offered access to all of his/her material. Some of the working groups in the safety cluster created handouts with important information and guidance, such as the "Safer Spaces Training Document" and these were incorporated as well.\
\
As the project's scope and ambition grew, the hope for a quick turnaround was quickly dispelled. Although we repurposed large portions of content, we also committed to authoring some original content, aimed to contextualize the more generic support materials within the context of OWS. Additionally, Icarus Project materials have traditionally maintained relatively high production values, incorporating sophisticated layouts, rich graphics, and professional typography. This emphasis on a graphical style resulted in publications that were more readable and accessible than text-heavy counterparts, and required more intensive, highly skilled labor. Finally, the material we were assembling included highly contentious topics, such as the use of coercion/violence, forced hospitalization, and psychiatric medication. Especially in the context of our inclusive collaborative authoring process, these factors all contributed to many rounds of edits, revisions, and debates. The contributors struggled with deliberative consensus building, endemic to OWS, and valiant efforts were made to forge a cohesive voice that everyone would be happy associating their names with.\
\
The core contributors to the project were geographically dispersed, including participants from Minneapolis, Richmond, San Francisco, Pittsburgh, New Hampshire, and Ohio. A small concentration of participants lived in New York, which became the hub of organizing around this project. The group hosted in-person edit-a-thons, where contributors met in person, with some of the remote contributors participating in real-time on conference call or over Skype. Early on we reached consensus around our tentative outline, the number of pages we were aiming for (approximately 35-40 pages; the final publication was 80 pages), and that the book would not be branded as an Icarus Project publication. While many of the contributors were affiliated with the Icarus Project, and the Icarus Project would be appropriately credited, it would not be placed center stage. The group was determined to incorporate perspectives beyond the project, and to involve contributors from outside the radical mental health movement.}