{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##(In)Validating the mainstream##\
\
Some of the participants in the project were new to the radical mental health conversation. They expressed their concern about creating a publication that would be welcoming to mainstream audiences, and not alienate them with insults and accusations.\
\
>Contributor03: As a lurker on this list, I'd like to share some hopes and fears that have arisen for me as I've witness the development of _Rising Up without Burning Out_. I've long been committed to radical politics, but I'm just learning about radical mental health. Over the past couple of weeks I've closely followed this list\'85 and attempted to both understand and explain this new (to me) and profoundly anti-oppressive conceptualization of "mental health."\'85\
\
>But, I've struggled. Both to clearly understand how I can contribute to the application of radical mental health on the ground as well as how to persuade friends and colleagues that radical mental health can play an important role in a non-violent movement. Many of the "support" volunteers (including myself) at Occupy come from pretty conventional health/mental health settings and have a more mainstream approach. At OWS, there has been an obvious tension between these individuals and others with a more radical perspective. It would be great if this publication could directly acknowledge this tension and attempt to provide a bridge between these groups.\
\
>Currently, some the language could be interpreted as blaming and exclusionary (e.g., "...Such mainstream approaches are therefore both product and tool of imperialism, capitalism, neoliberalism, and secularization; those very systems that Occupy is striving to undo...") and I worry it might serve to further divide the community, and not foster the goals of deepening understanding and acceptance.\
\
>So....my question: How can this publication be an open invitation to explore a more radical approach to mental health while still validating different perspectives and contributions? (2011a)\
\
Contributor03's question was taken seriously, and received a number of thoughtful responses. Contributor07 acknowledged the need for clear language, quoted some of these responses, and summarized a plan to respond to contributor03's challenge:\
\
>Contributor07: [quoting Contributor06]: Complex problems demand holistic solutions, and psychiatry and pharma are an instrumental cog in the wheel of oppression. Have individual psychiatrists and particular medications helped people? For sure. But the system on the whole is broken and corrupt at multiple layers, probably beyond reform or repair. \\*\\*We are desperately struggling for conceptual revolutions that will foster paradigm shifts in ontology, epistemology, and ethics.\\*\\* When the underlying models are contested, communication can be stilted and awkward. Almost like we aren't speaking the same language. What assumptions do you think we have made that we can make more explicit? What kind of clarifying statements or disclaimers do you think we should add? How can you imagine us engaging and incorporating mainstream perspectives into our work? [end quote]\
\
>I'd love to hear response to these questions - I think it could really help our dialog and make this document we're working on so much more useful. It's easy to write to the already converted. We need to imagine this writing reaching all kinds of folks who aren't steeped in radical mental health rhetoric. My experience, after 9 (!) years of working on the Icarus Project, is that it is incredibly powerful and useful to actually open up spaces where, from the start of the conversation, we make it clear that people who use diagnostic categories to describe themselves and people who think all the categories are bullshit are welcome, and that people who use psych drugs and people who would never touch them are all welcome. I think it gets really tricky when we have "service providers" who've been trained in the DSM language but don't have their own personal experiences on the inside of the psych system trying to "provide services" to people who've been in and out of the psych system\'85. I sincerely hear you [Contributor03] when you talk about trying to contribute to radical mental health "on the ground."\'85. I think one of our most important roles has to do with education, and if that's the case, I vote for us trying to be as clear and compelling as we possibly can with the language we're using. (2011a)\
\
Contributor03 replied, thanking Contributor07 for his/her thoughtful reply. He/she later followed up with a more thorough responses to these questions, which were directly incorporated into the final publication:\
\
> _>>> What assumptions do you think we have made that we can make more explicit?_\
\
> The shear volume of materials on the Booki is a little overwhelming. Much of it is very accessible and nuanced, but I think there is ambiguity that may trigger fear in some people. Particularly, I believe it is important to directly address the questions that are the reoccurring points of discussion on this listserv and others: -what about meds? -what about hospitalization? -what to do if you believe someone is suicidal?\
\
> Also, it would be helpful if early on in the document there was a succinct communication of the main tenets of the radical psych. This document requires a fair amount of work on the readers' part. And while that might be your intent, it is hard to inform or persuade people if you've already lost them\'85 [it] might help [to] engage people who aren't as informed or literate as you guys:\
\
>"1) the definitions around which behaviors are normal and abnormal is profoundly political 2) the primary goal of treatment should be empowerment and helping a person reach whatever their definition of healthy looks like rather than imposing a definition of health 3) many (most? all?) mental health issues are a response to trauma - personal trauma, familial trauma, social trauma, etc - and mental health must address the roots not only the symptoms  4) when it comes to consciousness and the brain, when it comes to neurochemistry and pharmacology there is so very much that we don't know, yet we treat people as if we did, and on a wider epidemiological level, we're making people worse. There is such a world of difference between humble questioning and informed consent and the current way the medical model plays out in real life - especially in institutional settings  5) consent and harm reduction are vital, not optional"\
\
> _>>> What kind of clarifying statements or_ _disclaimers do you think we should add?_\
\
> I really like the existing disclaimer. I believe is also important to acknowledge upfront that this document does not reflect the perspective of all Occupy participants. And that there is an active debate on the ground about how to best provide emotional support to protesters.\
\
> _>>>_ _How can you imagine us engaging and incorporating mainstream perspectives_ _into our work?_\
\
> My previous comments were unclear, but my intent was not that you validate mainstream \\*perspectives\\*\'85 those ideas have plenty of exposure, but that you validate mainstream \\*people\\*. That you recognize that there many people who work in mainstream mental health settings ---some of whom are involved with Occupy\'97who are deeply committed to anti-oppressive practices, who are also end users of mental health care, who are also traumatized by working in profoundly unjust and under-resourced systems, and whose' goal is give to hope and support to very people most victimized by those systems.  Yes we're cogs in a highly flawed system, but we can also be potential allies in any systemic change.  Currently, this document ignores us, which I fear could result in further division instead of community building (2011b).\
\
Exchanges like these were emotionally demanding, and required a great deal of patience on all sides to work through diplomatically. Undoubtedly, the project could have published something much faster had we not insisted on running an inclusive process, but we believed that by including these disparate perspectives, the resulting document would be more accessible, relevant, and useful. The final publication incorporated most of the feedback that Contributor03 provided, including succinct primers and introductions, and a visual design that was welcoming and accessible. A sustained interest in the book and its usage across a variety of contexts such as workshops and college courses, speak to the bridges it succeeded in building across disparate communities.\
\
The _Mindful Occupation_ contributors dealt with conflict using an approach similar to Occupy's consensus-based decision making. As I will show in the next section, the difficulties inherent in this approach were exacerbated by the fact that most of the group's communication was conducted electronically, slowing down exchanges and making them more prone to misunderstanding. Building consensus was painstaking and onerous, and in rare circumstances, such as the section dealing with coercion, the group decided to eliminate content rather than publish a formulation that was disagreeable to some. In other circumstances the group was able to represent their conflicts explicitly, either by reformulating the material as a question to the reader, or by expressing multiple viewpoints within the text. The text was assembled as a guide, and many sections could be read independently. There was some redundancy between sections, as well as a variety of voices represented throughout the book. Some disagreements were appeased by emphasizing alternate treatments in other sections of the book. Some contributors took issue with one chapter's emphasis on the biomedical model, but through a series of sidebars they agreed that we should include a shortened version of that chapter, since it portrayed a style of support that one of the contributors valued, based on their lived experience.\
\
The contributor's commitment to consensus required more time and energy than many had hoped for. When the group first convened, they had originally hoped to publish materials quickly. The scope of the project grew, and the book's length, aesthetic aspirations and larger ambitions stretched the project from weeks to months. What began as a series of handouts, grew into a zine, and ultimately, an 80 page, independently published book\'97complete with a perfect bound spine, an ISBN number and a distributor. The contributors were uniformly satisfied with the final publication, which led directly to the OccupyAPA protests we will examine closely in the next chapter.\
}