{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Suicidal Thoughts, Violence, and Hospitalization#\
\
Unsurprisingly, the sections relating to coercion, suicide, violence, medication, diagnosis, and hospitalization also generated tremendous controversy, which was challenging for the collaborators to navigate. In relation to a section outlining responses to a situation where someone might harm themselves, the issue of forced hospitalization surfaced. The draft in the booki read: "Coercion should only be used as a last resort, and to protect people from violence done by others, NOT to protect people from themselves."\
\
> Contributor08 reacted: "Coercion should never be an option. I don't agree with this last sentence." (2011).\
\
> Contributor04 responded: "This is really seeming to me like a case of principle being privileged over people. Who benefits from allowing someone in crisis to commit suicide rather than be hospitalized? Who benefits from waiting until a person who's posing a clear threat to others has harmed someone, and the situation becomes a police issue? As much as no one wants to be hospitalized against his or her will, the implicit assumption here that the criminal justice system is in any way less abusive is absurd. And once in the criminal justice system, odds are a person in crisis will end up spending some time in a really crap inpatient facility. It certainly isn't benefitting him or her, nor does it benefit any larger community. I'm sorry, this just seems like a ridiculous position to take to me." (2011).\
\
Contributor05, the original author of the booki draft replied:\
\
> @[contributor08]: I liked your edit as it's a bit clearer to read than my 1st draft, although the last sentence does still present coercion as an option, just gets more specific on the types of coercion one might use, I don't know if that was your intention. My basic idea was that coercion should only be used when it's that or let someone seriously harm others in the space, and that it shouldn't ever be used pre-emptively.\
\
> @[contributor04]: I AM SO FUCKING SICK AND TIRED of hearing this bullshit "concern" from those who say opposing forced treatment is "principle being privileged over people". Guess what, a lot of us, I'd even say most of us, who are fighting against it aren't doing so because of our abstract principles of respect for civil liberties, but because \\*we have been victims of abuse by an abusive system\\*. Who are you to say that to lock people up is always better than "to leave people to their own devices", or more to the point, that it's \\*ever\\* an either-or choice? (2011).\
\
This exchange was just one example of many that mirrored intractable standoffs between different positions within the mental health activist movements. As a project that was attempting to represent and help bridge some of these perspectives, one of the project's organizers wrote:\
\
> Contributor01: The debate about forced treatment has been ongoing for decades and isn't going to be resolved in this zine. Personally, i find that a lot of people use "not wanting to use coercion" as a way to duck the hard questions of what needs to be done when there is clearly violence/coercion being used already and/or used in weird ways (it's okay to call the police, but not EMS)\'85 [R]ight now there are mental health folks involved in occupy that see nothing wrong with regularly using 72 hour holds etc and some of this attitude has filtered down to medics. I think the best we can do is problematize that and ask questions. We don't need to provide the answers\'85 (2011).\
\
This sentiment was echoed and reinforced by contributor07:\
\
> [I]t's the responsibility of folks like [us], who've been locked up against our wills to be good role models for the community and help people through crisis when we can with the skills we've developed from our own experiences going through the fire. but folks like us aren't always going to be there and i know for myself that i'm not always in a place to be able to help someone when they are desperate, especially if they're acting violent. once again, i find myself writing an email to a bunch of people i mostly don't know in real life, longing for the kind of intimacy where we know how to take care of one another when we're having a hard time. in the meantime, lets at least do our best to be respectful of each other's opinions and remember that we're all struggling together and hoping to put something out there in the world that's going to empower people. it's clear we're not going to agree on this issue, so lets expand our vision and get as creative about it as possible. (2011b).\
\
Ultimately, the version we published, with everyone's consent, avoided making any absolute assertions. It also emphasized the importance of following up after the hospitalization:\
\
> If considering hospitalization or incarceration, take responsibility for your decisions and be clear about your motives\'97it'll make your presence more effective. Don't send someone to the hospital or call the police because it's "better than doing nothing." Let people know about community resources, and together figure out ways to meet their needs without harming others. Calling the police or sending someone to the emergency room for mental health concerns should be a last resort, after consultation with friends and allies. Consider first the potential ramifications including imprisonment, deportation/ loss of immigration status, increased depression, undue medication, shame, a prison record, loss of custody/visitation rights, interruption of life, loss of anonymity, and health care debt, as well as further scrutiny of protests, police brutality, sensationalist media representations, and so on.\
\
> If someone is hospitalized or incarcerated, follow through by organizing visits and other communication. When they come out, help them process why the support team made the decisions they did. Try to be receptive to their critique and/or anger and/or gratitude. (Imai et al., 2012: 44).\
\
Our decision to include a range of stakeholders from diverse backgrounds slowed our process down significantly, but also resulted in a more balanced document that captured and embodied our underlying message, emphasizing the importance of incorporating multiple perspectives into the formulation of these recommendations. It was very challenging to blend some of the most radical voices with more traditional and pragmatic ones, but the effort yielded a more nuanced guide that was sensitive to the concerns of all the contributors. In addition to confronting the hard question about how to handle an emotional crisis, we tried to emphasize the importance of follow up\'97visiting patients, supporting them after discharge, and teaching protesters about the devastating impact of mental health bills and shortcomings of insurance, even for those who are insured. The collaborators aspired to raise questions and consciousness, without necessarily providing all the answers.\
\
}