{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #What is Radical Mental Health?#\
\
There were also many sections offering concrete guidance and practical advice. The book opens with a description of these aims, the background of the contributors, and the relevance to occupy.\
\
> What you hold in your hands is a rough toolkit of ideas and visions. It is meant to be shared, discussed and used for action as the Occupy movement evolves\'85 The folks who put together this booklet come from different backgrounds, all involved with on-the-ground Occupy protests in various cities and towns. Many of us have been working on issues of radical mental health and activism for quite some time, involved with groups such as the Icarus Project, MindFreedom International, and the Freedom Center. Others are mental health professionals and street medics who have been involved in supporting the Occupy protesters on the ground. What binds us together is respect for each other's personal experiences, and our commitment to community-based approaches to emotional support\'85. There is an urgent need to talk publicly about the relationship between social injustice and our mental health. We need to start redefining what it actually means to be mentally healthy, not just on an individual level, but on collective, communal, and global levels. (p. 10)\
\
The _Mindful Occupation_ collaborators attempted to define radical mental health through a series of concepts and associations, including interconnectedness, diversity, embodied expertise, options and politics. We emphasized the importance of not dividing people into "normal" and "pathological", rather we try to see first a person, not a beaker full of neurotransmitters. We portrayed human experience as "a holistic convergence of social, emotional, cultural, physical, spiritual, historical, and environmental elements." (p. 15) Strangely, the idea that healing is fostered by community, peer-support and mutual aid has not been widely adopted by the mainstream. Mainstream psychiatry also refuses to critique society and injustice, and fails to incorporate this kind of analysis into their explanations of trauma and suffering.\
\
We proposed that one of the important ways to invent and enact the new language we advocate is by creating safe spaces for people to share their own subjective narratives with each other, without judgment. This process is evident in the publication that emerged from the dialog around this project, as well as in workshops and teachins that followed the publication of this book. This publication represents an incremental step towards the development of new ways of talking about mental health and well being.\
\
}