{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Conclusion#\
\
My experiences participating in the OWS Support group alongside my experiences collaborating on the _Mindful Occupation_ book were deeply transformative and helped solidify and clarify my understanding of the emerging wave of psychiatric resistance. Central to both projects was the question of voice\'97Who speaks, who listens, and who is involved in the production of knowledge? When I first began my fieldwork in Zuccotti I believed that if the mental health workers involved in Occupy were not receptive to the Icarus Project's messaging about the need for a new language to discuss mental illness, the Icarus Project needed to revise their message. The Icarus Project was forged in activist contexts, and from the beginning they challenged the clinical and diagnostic language of DSM, advocating for the importance of community, peer-support, and the acceptance of alternative narratives around mental health and illness. My experiences at Occupy provided me with a much clearer understanding of how difficult it can be to truly follow the disability right's mandate: "nothing about us without us".\
\
To be clear, many of the mental health professionals at Occupy turned out to be strong allies with the mental health activists, but I was regularly surprised by the nature and degree of resistance by some of the mental health supporters to the perspectives and opinions of un-credentialed supporters like peers and former patients. As the exchanges above demonstrate, some of the professional social workers clung to their professional jargon, insisting it was simply innocuous professional shorthand, or that their patients preferred it. Others listened to the critiques, but rolled their eyes, looked restless and bored, or otherwise dismissed the concerns of the radical mental health activists as theoretical or esoteric. In the most extreme case, the psychiatrist who visited Zuccotti became visibly agitated and raised his voice in objection to the perceived attack on the legitimacy of his profession. The radical mental health activists involved in the _Mindful Occupation_ project also had a very difficult time listening to and incorporating perspectives different from their own, and these standoffs helped bring into relief the difference between the previous wave and the emerging wave of mental health activism. Activists representing the new wave went to greater lengths to listen to perspectives outside of the own, and to entertain ideas outside of their comfort zones.\
\
One important lesson to emerge from these interactions is that healing and education take a great deal of time and energy. There is no one-liner, however potent, that will alter entrenched habits and ideologies. Many of these beliefs are deeply ingrained, through years of professionalization or traumatic experiences. As with any belief that exists within a network of other beliefs, resistance to change is dictated by emotional valences as much as rational deliberation. It is easy to imagine that when the professional social workers were thrust into a position of power, it was tempting for them to exercise this newfound superiority. Typically, in their institutional settings, social workers are at the bottom of the hierarchy, regularly looked own upon by psychiatrists and administrators. In psychiatric hospitals, psychiatrists, psychologists, and nurses earn higher salaries than social workers and command more respect and prestige. Social workers typically earn masters degrees, instead of MDs or PhDs, and though they may earn other certifications to practice counseling or therapy, many grapple with inferiority complexes comparing themselves to mental health professionals with terminal degrees. Similarly, when the radical mental health activists were given a setting where they could speak their mind to the psychiatric establishment, or at least a representative proxy for that establishment, it was tempting for them to disregard the individual people on the receiving end of their venomous attacks.\
\
The radical mental health activists also learned how much work they have ahead of them in terms of spreading and popularizing their message. Many of the social workers were eager and receptive to learn more about radical mental health, and how they might apply its lessons in practice. However, even among the Occupy supporters, many had not heard of some of the leading Mental Health activist projects, and their primary association to psychiatric resistance was the caricature of resistance popularized by anti-psychiatry. Occupy provided an important stage to introduce these topics, as the event brought together a diverse cross-section of activists from a variety of backgrounds working on a diverse set of issues. In the course of these efforts it became clear how urgent and important it was to continue teaching and promoting these ideas. Occupy attracted a range of social critics, but almost without exception, none of Occupy's leaders or theorists incorporated a critique of the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex into their analysis of power and society. These issues were not broached in the stump speeches of Noam Chomsky, Naomi Klein, Cornel West, Slovak \'8ei\'9eek, or countless others, though as _Mindful Occupation_ argues, the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex plays a vital role in maintaining the socio-economic status quo, playing a vital role in supporting stigma and alienation, and contributing to social and economic inequality.\
\
Our country has been in a social recession far longer than the financial one. It will take a long time to unlearn our self-defeating habits and embrace languages of compassion and liberation, instead of mistrust and fear. First, we need to believe in the future\'97vividly imagine it, talk about it and manifest it. This movement, and activism in general, is notorious for its cycles of energetic bursts of creativity, followed by a crash. We have to be self-aware of these patterns, and take better care of ourselves and each other. We need to be more honest with ourselves about what we can tackle, learn how to recognize our triggers, learn how to say no, and learn how and when to bottom-line, delegate and collaborate. We especially need to avoid replicating habits of exploitation and oppression in our day-to-day interactions. We need to actively build our support networks when we are well, and create wellness plans that our friends can use to help support us when we aren't. But, mostly, we need to re-learn how to breathe, share and trust.\
}