{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #A Pivotal Moment#\
\
The 2012 APA protest captured a pivotal moment in history of the mental health movement. The year leading up to this event witnessed a number of factors that increased participation and amplified the energy of the protests. In the months preceding the 2012 APA protest, the Occupy movement erupted, and activists, representing a range of causes, piggybacked on the movement's visibility and enthusiasm to mobilize support around their issues. As we saw in the last chapter, mad activists were among those energized by Occupy, and the language of Occupy spilled over to the APA protests, which were sometimes branded "Occupy APA".\
\
The year also witnessed some high profile critiques of the profession of psychiatry, including Marcia Angell's favorable reviews of _The Emperor's New Drugs: Exploding the Antidepressant Myth_(Kirsch, 2010), _Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric Drugs, and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in America_(Whitaker, 2010) and _Unhinged: The Trouble With Psychiatry\'97A Doctor's Revelations About a Profession in Crisis_ (Carlat, 2010) in the _New York Review of Books_ (2011). A number of documentary film projects engaging the issues of mental health and corruption in the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex entered production around this time, and some of these filmmakers documented the APA protests. In 2012 The Icarus Project turned 10, signifying the sustainability and staying power of the organization. And the APA protests in May 2012 would turn out to be one the last public protests led by David Oaks, the founder and longtime head of Mindfreedom and an important leader in the mad movement, for he would suffer a serious spinal chord injury in December 2012 that would severely limit his later capacity for organizing. The APA protest thus marks a changing of the generational guard.\
\
Most significantly, the 2012 APA marked the release of the DSM-5 proposal, the culmination of 12 years of work following a process riddled with public controversy. With this release the APA switched from using Roman numerals to Arabic numerals in anticipation of the need to clearly indicate future versions and point releases. One of the most vocal and prominent critics of the DSM-5 included Dr. Allen Frances, the head of the DSM-IV task force. Frances received his MD from the Downstate Medical Center in 1967 and a certificate in psychoanalytic medicine from Columbia University's Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research in 1978. He served as the chairman of the department of psychiatry at Duke University's School of Medicine and was the founding editor of two prominent psychiatric journals. Frances authored a series of articles starting in March 2010 on the _Psychology Today_ blog called "DSM 5 in Distress" which later led to the publication in May 2013 of his bestselling book _Saving Normal: An Insider's Revolt Against Out-of-Control Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-5, Big Pharma, and the Medicalization of Ordinary Life_. Mainstream media outlets in print (New York Times (Satel, 2013), the _Wall Street Journal_ (Tavris, 2013), the _Washington Post_ (Petri, 2013)), radio (_NPR_ (Flatow, 2013), and television news (_NBC_ (Nash, 2013), _ABC_ (Moisse, 2012), _CBS_ (Jaslow and Castillo, 2013), _Fox_ (Grush, 2013)) all covered the DSM's new release, and reported on the controversy surrounding it. Debates raged over topics such as the elimination of the bereavement exclusion for diagnosing clinical depression, the consolidation and tightening definitions around autism-related diagnoses, and the diagnosis of behavioral disorders in children such as pediatric bipolar, oppositional defiance disorder, and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.\
\
After DSM-5's unveiling at the 2012 APA, an open letter was drafted and endorsed by more than 50 Mental Health Organizations, and signed by over 15 thousand people, including psychiatrists, other mental health professionals, patients, and activists. The supporting organizations included numerous divisions of the American Psychological Association, alongside psychoanalytic and counseling associations. The signatories included strong representation from professional associations focused on minority issues, such as women, LGBT, African-American and Latino, as well as international support from associations in Britain, Denmark, India and Italy. The petition raised a number of concerns about the DSM-5 proposal relating to both the substantive content of the proposal as well as the process around its drafting.\
\
>Our three primary concerns in the letter were as follows: the DSM\'965 proposals appear to lower diagnostic thresholds, expanding the purview of mental disorder to include normative reactions to life events; some new proposals (e.g., "Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder" and "Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome") seem to lack the empirical grounding necessary for inclusion in a scientific taxonomy; newly proposed disorders are particularly likely to be diagnosed in vulnerable populations, such as children and the elderly, for whom the over-prescription of powerful psychiatric drugs is already a growing nationwide problem; and the increased emphasis on medico-biological theories for mental disorder despite the fact that recent research strongly points to multifactorial etiologies. (Coalition for DSM-5 Reform, 2012)\
\
Regarding the drafting process, the letter also criticized the DSM-5 task force for delays, for cancelling field trials and forensic reviews, and for hiring a public relations firm to manage the brewing controversies. Most damning, the letter sharply criticized the task force for releasing a manual with such low reliability. Reliability is a statistical measure of different doctors' agreement on a diagnosis when presented with the same set of symptoms. Frances interprets and historicizes the papers published (Clarke, 2013; Regier, 2013; Narrow, 2013) by the DSM-5 leadership reporting the results of its field trial, in what he describes as a "distressingly misleading paper":\
\
>According to the authors, 14 of the 23 disorders had "very good" or "good" reliability; 6 had questionable, but 'acceptable' levels; and just three had "unacceptable" rates. Sounds okay until you look at the actual data and discover that the cheerful words used by the DSM-5 leaders simply don't fit their extremely disappointing results. The paper is a classic example of Orwellian 'newspeak'. When DSM-5 failed to achieve acceptable reliability by historical standards, the DSM-5 leadership arbitrarily decided to move the goal posts in and lower the bar in defining what is 'acceptable'\'85. DSM-5 cheapens the coinage of reliability by hyping these merely 'okay' levels as 'very good'. Then it gets much worse\'85 9 DSM-5 disorders\'85 previously would have been considered just plain 'poor', but DSM-5 puffs these up as 'good'. Then DSM-5 has the chutzpah to call acceptable the 6 disorders that achieved lousy, absolutely unacceptable reliabilities.... DSM-5 finally finds unacceptable\'85 3 diagnoses\'85 (which is barely better than chance). (Frances, 2012)\
\
The DSM-5's release in 2013 also prompted the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the federal agency which funds over $1.5 billion yearly in psychiatric research, to disavow the work. In a press release issued on April 29, 2013, Tom Insel, the director of the NIMH, wrote that the NIMH would be "re-orienting its research away from DSM categories. Going forward, we will be supporting research projects that look across current categories \'96 or sub-divide current categories \'96 to begin to develop a better system." (Insel, 2013). Insel continues to critique the reliability and validity of the DSM with a surprising statement that ironically validates the longstanding position of many anti-psychiatrists. The NIMH's position sounds remarkably similar to the claim of activists and critical scholars that the diagnoses defined in the DSM are socially constructed:\
\
>While DSM has been described as a "Bible" for the field, it is, at best, a dictionary, creating a set of labels and defining each. The strength of each of the editions of DSM has been "reliability" \'96 each edition has ensured that clinicians use the same terms in the same ways. The weakness is its lack of validity. Unlike our definitions of ischemic heart disease, lymphoma, or AIDS, the DSM diagnoses are based on a consensus about clusters of clinical symptoms, not any objective laboratory measure.\
\
Insel has also gone on record validating another longtime contention of anti-psychiatry, questioning the scientific evidence for "chemical imbalance" as the causal mechanism underlying mental illness. In a front page story in the Philadelphia Inquirer leading up to the APA conference on May 5, 2012, Insel is quoted saying: "There is no biochemical imbalance that we have ever been able to demonstrate. What we think about are changes in circuitry and how the brain is processing information." (Burling, 2012)\
\
I will return to the implications of Insel's declaration, on both psychiatry and the mad movement, in my conclusion. In this chapter we will focus on how these pent-up forces were unleashed in Philadelphia, in a moment that was primed for transformation and high drama.}