{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #The Friends Center#\
\
At 10am on Saturday morning, a protest rally preceding the march was held in the Quaker-run Friends Center in downtown Philadelphia. Over a hundred protesters were seated in the pews of the chapel, surrounded by large signs with protest slogans arrayed along the walls. The morning talks were well planned and followed a printed program of speakers. A microphone was set up at the front of the room and Caitlan Belforti, an articulate college activist, actress and poet in her early twenties, introduced the speakers who were each given seven minutes to talk.\
\
Protestors ranged in ages from teenagers to senior citizens, and came from across the United States. The march was organized my Mind Freedom International, based in Portland, Oregon, and a number of representatives from the pacific northwest had travelled to Philly to help organize the event. Jim Gottstein, a mental health advocacy lawyer and the founder of Psych Rights traveled from Fairbanks, Alaska to join the protest. He brought T-shirts and signs with an image of Lucy from Peanuts waiting idly for patients with a sign over her head reading "Psychiatric "Help" ~~5~~~~ \'a2~~$500' and the caption\'97The doctor was A) Fooled B) Complicit". There were also many representatives from the North-East, including a full bus of activists from upstate New York who were involved in organizing around mental health and prison issues, a contingent from New England, where a growing community has formed around the popular blog _Mad in America_, named after Robert Whitaker's 2010 book investigating scientific cover-ups in the pharmaceutical industry and a history of the mistreatment of the mentally ill in 20th century America (Whitaker, 2010). Activists also carpooled from the South, driving from as far as Virginia, North Carolina and Louisiana.\
\
Belforti introduced most of the speakers by stating their ages, organizational affiliations, and for most, their earliest encounters with the psychiatric system. The majority of the speakers began their speeches by sharing their personal experiences with psychiatry and, in most cases, their disengagement from the system through the rejection of diagnoses and/or psychiatric medications. Many were also quite accomplished in their fields, and the speaker lineup included community organizers, lawyers, PhDs, and mental health professionals.\
\
The theme of the rally was a critique of the DSM-5, and in particular the dehumanizing effect of labels and diagnoses. Popular rallying cries also included a shared outrage at forced drugging and electroshock treatment, along with the growing trend of diagnosing and drugging children. The morning speakers rarely formulated their critiques in the language of orthodox anti-psychiatry, and few categorically denied the existence of mental illness or condemned the use of psychiatric medications outright. The leadership of the movement went to great lengths to be inclusive of those who decide to take medication, and was deliberate about saying so. Nonetheless, at times their inclusiveness sounded half-hearted and condescending, with a tone that suggested that anyone who was fully informed would opt for alternatives.\
\
The APA protest rally featured orthodox anti-psychiatrists /psychiatric survivors alongside the emerging wave of mental health activists demanding participation, empowerment, and authorship of their own narratives. The dogmatic sentiments of the old guard are evident in the writings of contemporary anti-psychiatrists such as Peter Breggin (1991), Seth Farber (2013) and Bonnie Burstow (2015). Breggin, a practicing psychiatrist has published numerous books and articles critical of psychiatry, and in particular, argues against the use of psychiatric medications and ECT under almost any circumstance. In the tradition of R.D. Laing, he blames patient's families for their suffering, and prescribes empathy and love instead of drugs. Farber is a psychologist who argues that mad folk are fundamentally misunderstood by society and represent the spiritual vanguard who will help usher in a messianic era. Burstow is a feminist therapist and on the faculty of education at the University of Toronto. She describes herself as an "abolitionist" and argues that the institution of psychiatry is fundamentally corrupt and beyond reform. She calls for replacing it with peer-to-peer social services, and condemns all psychiatric drugs as brain damaging, masking the very dysfunctions they create.\
\
Organizations such as Mind Freedom International are strongly rooted in the politics of orthodox anti-psychiatry, denying the existence of mental illness and demonizing the entire field of psychiatry. Traces of these sentiments appear throughout the morning speeches. To my ears, the tension between the old and the new is audible whenever I encounter the categorical assertions condemning the entire practice of psychiatry, devoid of context. When activists make normative claims about how other patients should narrate their experiences, they expose themselves to the same critique that the emerging wave of criticism has leveled against the psychiatric establishment. Specifically, the arguments for patient/consumer/survivor self-determination and empowerment apply equally to the forcefulness of both the psychiatric and anti-psychiatric establishments. Neither psychiatry nor anti-psychiatry can speak exclusively on behalf of the individual, construct their identity, or write their narrative for them. The kind of participation that the new wave of mental health activists are advocating for includes demanding a voice, as well as listening to all of the actors involved in a controversy, and not obliterating their perspective by shouting over them or ignoring them. When anti-psychiatrists refute the positive experiences of people who find support in professional mental health treatment, they are guilty of privileging their own interpretation of reality and dictating other people's narratives.\
\
Consider the speech of Laura Delano, a sharp, energetic young woman in her early thirties who identifies as a psychiatric-survivor, works as a peer-specialist, and is an active blogger and editor for _Mad in America_. Laura was diagnosed with major depression at 14, bipolar at 18, and was "struggling to manage life instead of living it" until 27, when she shed her labels and meds. Her speech at the rally was impassioned and authentic, and she choked back tears as she defiantly relayed her personal story of recovery.\
\
>The profound anger I have today for those still labeled, and those still trapped within the biomedical paradigm of psychiatry, is a healthy one that fuels me and motivates me to do whatever I can to make a change\'85 It is one of the greatest existential insults to slap a biomedical label onto the experience of being an emotive human being, no matter how well intentioned the labeler may be\'85 If you are here today and believe that the speech I just gave of how mentally ill I am, I respect your right to believe what you want and only ask that you keep an open mind and an open heart to what we have to say today. If you are here today and have freed yourself from psychiatric labels, I send you a deep and loving congratulations. If you are here today, still enslaved by your labels and the treatment they require, and want liberation, join this movement and find your path towards recovery. We are here waiting for you to walk together with you towards equality and justice for everyone, regardless of how uniquely each of us experiences this complicated and painful unbelievably beautiful thing we call life. (Delano, 2012)\
\
Contrast Delano's statement with that of Aki Imai. Imai is a 25 year old student of clinical psychiatry who collaborated on the Mindful Occupation zine, and also started the submission-based blog, "Life after Labels". "Life after Labels" was modeled on the very popular "It Gets Better" campaign, which encouraged LGBT adults to create short personal video messages of support directed at LGBT youth (It Gets Better Project, (n.d.)). The "It Gets Better" project was started in Sept 2010 by the syndicated columnist and author Dan Savage. Savage created a YouTube video to telegraph messages of hope to young people facing harassment after a string of LGBT bullying incidents. The video went viral and helped spawn a global movement, inspiring 50,000 video messages that have been viewed over 50 million times. Imai was inspired by this project and started "Life after Labels," soliciting short, first person text or video accounts of recovery. In describing his motivation for creating this site, Imai explains:\
\
>I wanted to help people find hope\'85 and present a challenge against DSM. The DSM steals authorship from our own life stories. Suddenly your story doesn't matter anymore. You are reduced into symptoms, and consequently a label\'85 I'm not saying that the label itself is a bad thing. I don't have a problem if you like the label, or if you don't like the label\'85 'When I want to know what misogyny is, I don't ask a man. When I want to know what racism is, I don't ask a white person. When I want to know what homophobia is, I don't ask a heterosexual. When I want to know what transphobia is, I don't ask a cisgender person. When I want to know what ableism is, I don't ask an able-bodied person. If you want to understand the experience of the oppressed, the conditions of oppression are best articulated by the oppressed.' So, likewise if you want to understand experience of those with psychological distress, you do not ask people who are not experiencing psychological distress. You do not ask people who are trying to categorize personal experiences into cookie cutter definitions\'85 This is also to make a statement that we do not need to rely on a hegemonic, aggressive system to manage us, but we can take care of each other. To take co-authorship in a movement, where we can take authorship of our lifestories back from the DSM, and back into our lives.\
\
Although both Delano and Imai express similar sentiments, the difference between their arguments is both subtle and crucial. For Delano, "enslavement" comes with the diagnostic label itself, and the biomedical model it's associated with. For Imai, "oppression" comes from act of being labeled by an external authority, powerless to label yourself, even if you ultimately choose label yourself according to the diagnostic categories of the DSM. For Delano, there is no true recovery or liberation within the paradigm of the biomedical model, while for Imai the essential question is one of "authorship" of one's identity and life story. For Imai, someone who choses to identify themselves with a DSM label is not oppressed while Delano believes DSM labels are inherently oppressive, regardless of who assigns them. These two speeches encapsulate much of the shift from orthodox anti-psychiatry to the emerging wave of mad resistance.\
\
For years, critics of anti-psychiatry have expressed concern that the movement romanticizes suffering and doesn't acknowledge the agency of those who self-identify as mentally ill (Jamison, 1997; Styron, 1992). Orthodox anti-psychiatrists argue that anyone who considers himself or herself sick is ignorant or deluded by the false paradigms promoted by psychiatry. Imai's formulation captures an alternative position, one that emphasizes agency, empowerment, participation, and self-determination.\
\
This position is also evident in the protest's most visible direct action, the "label ripping" ceremony conducted Saturday afternoon in front of the Philadelphia convention center. Faith Rhyne, a co-organizer of the protest, described the action at the morning rally at the Friend's Center. Rhyne lives in North Carolina and is a brilliant and prolific artist and writer, as well as a peer-counselor and mental health community organizer. Rhyne explained:\
\
>We're going to do a ceremony today as we protest the APA and the DSM-5\'85 We're going to rip up some labels. We've got labels that say "Not OK"\'85 "Sick". "Chemically imbalanced". "Psychotic". "Sczophenric". "Bipolar". "Borderline". "Depressed". We've got those labels. We've got about 500 of them\'85 So, we're going to be rallying some folks up there at the protest -- we can hand you some labels\'85 and, we can tear them up. People are going to be filming. We encourage people to make a statement. Tear up the label that you were given, and state yourself as how you believe yourself to be. We all believe the most basic human right is the right to define our own experiences in ways that uplift us and nurture what is best and most true about ourselves, as we have identified it.\
\
Notably, the pre-printed labels included DSM diagnoses as well as more generic labels like "Not OK" or "Chemically Imbalanced". These labels refute the clinical gaze and the act of labeling, in addition to specific DSM diagnoses. Crucially, the label ripping ceremony was followed by an assertive proclamation by the protestor of how they prefer to identify themselves, which was captured on video, posted on YouTube, and circulated on social media. Rhyne also described her experience with being labeled:\
\
>Philadelphia inquirer covered this event on their front page - the head of the APA responded\'85 with the statement \'96 "a label may save a life". That was not my experience. Nor has it been the experience of many, many people that I know love and support. What I found was that receiving my label when I did robbed me of my life. Robbed me of my potential of my understanding of myself. And I lived under those lies.\
\
Without over-analyzing any particular formulation or turn of phrase, it is worth noting that Rhyne habitually "speaks from the I". Delano states: "It is one of the greatest existential insults to slap a biomedical label onto the experience of being an emotive human being", an argument formulated in a passive voice, which categorically applies to all of humanity. By contrast, Rhyne roots her argument in her own direct experience, and the experiences of her friends and loved ones. This pattern of speech is indicative of the ideology that underlies the shift I am describing\'97a shift from universal imperatives and towards a recognition and respect for subjective experience and its bearing on knowledge.\
}