{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Extreme Mental and Emotional Problems##\
\
The speeches at the Friend Center rally engaged in many issues beyond identity politics, labeling, and the DSM. The movement's leadership illustrated some of the other concerns permeating the atmosphere. They raised policy issues including forced outpatient treatment, regulatory reform of the FDA and excessive drugging of prisoners and foster children. Overarching critiques of the system overlapped with critiques of an individual's choice to embrace the language and tools of psychiatry, since the policies are written using language inherently oppressive to many of the activists.\
\
Lauren Tenney is a professor of environmental psychology at CUNY who was institutionalized at 15. She is now a leading human rights activist who identifies as a psychiatric survivor. In her speech she accused psychiatry of murder, torture and slavery. She characterized psychiatry's actions as "absolutely inhumane and torturous". Citing research that shows that psychiatric drugging can lead to a 25-30 year loss of life, she equated forced drugging with "murder". Finally, she argued that state-ordered treatment programs prevent people from working in their preferred job, forcing them to work in others, which she equated with "slavery".\
\
Tenney's accusations captured the rage and frustration felt by many in the room towards the psychiatric establishment. She is a young organizer, in her early thirties, who has devoted herself to the struggle against forced electroshock, drugging, and coercion. Her rhetoric is typical of a fiery protest speech, and was met with cheers and applause. It is worth noting the raw emotional outrage contained in these accusations, and the great chasm that was bridged when a group of psychiatrists invited these activists to their meeting later that weekend. Tenney was careful to blame organizations and structural forces, although she called for holding individuals accountable for these systemic human rights violations.\
\
Jim Gottstein is an attorney, a psychiatric survivor, and founder of PsychRights. He is a long-time advocate for the mentally ill who regularly goes to court defending patients and prisoners in Alaska from forced psychiatric treatment. In 2008 he filed suit against then Gov. Sarah Palin seeking to stop the forced medication of children in foster homes and juvenile detention centers. The suit was dismissed a year later when the court decided that PsychRights lacked standing, but Gottstein has continued to champion the rights of children and prisoners. Gottstein lays out a series of structural and policy issues and demands reform and accountability.\
\
Gottstein stressed the role of the movement in piercing the "veil of lies about [the psychiatric industry] practices and the great harm it causes", and called on the crowd to spread the word about "the great physical carnage" psychiatry causes which prevents people from getting "their lives back on track". He raised the issue of court-ordered shock therapy against the will of the patient, the "horror of the massive psychiatric drugging of poor children on Medicaid", and the drugging of infants, which he claimed was mostly illegal. He called on the crowd to counter the "power of the psycho-pharmaceutical complex" by "exercising\'85 the power of the people". Regarding DSM-5, he argued that "psychiatry uses dubious labels to drive up drug sales, lock people up, and force them to endure harmful counterproductive drugs and electroshock against their will." He implored the protesters to "stand against this", especially since the "prospective fifth edition of the diagnostic and statistical manual will make this even worse". Gottstein concluded by acknowledging that the people at the rally are "the lucky ones" whow are "not locked up by psychiatry", unlike those "so debilitated by the drugs that [they] couldn't come." He charged the crowd with the task of with speaking for those who are "so debilitated by the drugs that they can't speak up for themselves."\
\
In the course of his systematic condemnation of psychiatry Gottstein pays lip service to respecting adults who choose to take psychiatric medications. "Now, I do know people who find their psychiatric medications helpful, adults, and they should be available to adults who want them. At the same time, they should be told the truth about them, including that there are other approaches that work for many people far better and without the tremendous harm caused by the drugs." However, the tone of his delivery is grudging. His categorical condemnation of psychiatric drugs and the harm they cause is an attitude that continues to alienate many people struggling with emotional crises who choose to use psychiatric medication. The distinction between Gottstein's position and more inclusive declarations is often subtle, and more a matter of tone than precise wording.\
\
Informed consent is the standard that the Icarus Project clings to, but it is a difficult standard to meet. Information about the risks of psychiatric medication is hard to come by, and consent is hard to obtain from children, prisoners, and seniors with Alzheimer's or dementia. However, contrast Gottstein's phrasing with the more welcoming and inclusive language of The Icarus Project. Icarus meetings always start with a preamble, which includes the following statement:\
\
>This is a space for people to come together and learn from each other's different views and experiences of madness. People who take psychiatric drugs are welcome here, as are people who don't take psychiatric drugs. People who use diagnosis categories to describe themselves are welcome, as are people who define themselves differently. The Icarus Project values self-determination and mutual support.\
\
The Icarus Project and the Freedom Center has jointly published the _Harm Reduction Guide to Coming off of Psychiatric Drugs_, explaining that a "harm reduction" approach "means not being pro- or anti- medication, but supporting people where they are at to make their own decisions, balancing the risks and benefits involved." (Hall, 2007). The horrors and abuses of the psychiatric system are very real, but the reaction to these horrors has created an environment that is sometimes hostile and stigmatizing to those who have chosen to incorporate psychiatric medications into their treatment regiment. Unlike orthodox anti-psychiatrists like Breggin or Burstow, Gottstein doesn't reject psychiatric medications outright, but his tone and body language betray his sentiments, and helped foster an atmosphere that many who identify with the emerging wave of mad pride activists find discomforting.\
\
Finally, David Oaks, the founder of Mindfreedom and one of the main co-organizers of the protest, spoke for more than ten minutes. He compared the movement to the anti-slavery movement and called for the creation of a modern-day underground railroad to save people from involuntary outpatient commitment and forced outpatient drugging. He spoke of the need for a "non-violent revolution" and claimed that the mad movement represented "the 100%" of humanity. Oaks regularly draws inspiration from the civil rights movement, and has worked hard over the years to craft his message to be more inclusive. Oaks graduated from Harvard in 1977, where was institutionalized five times during his undergraduate years (Neil, 1983). He wrote his senior thesis about the Mental Patients Liberation Front, and credits them with teaching him about "backpacking, friendship, anti-sexism, radical politics, community organizing, grant writing, press releases, dealing with the press, handling meetings, finding that trusted people can filch from the treasury" (p. 28). At the morning rally, he was greeted with loud applause and remarked:\
\
>We are unstoppable. We are the 100%. We are the human spirit\'85 But really what we are saying is that this is about being human. This is about pathologizing being human. To be human is to have extreme states. To be human is to wrestle with overwhelm. To be human is not to have a grip on reality. To be human is to be unique and different. This is about the human spirit, and that's why we're going to win\'85. [The APA has] extreme mental and emotional problems\'85. We need to put some psychiatrists in prison\'85. We really are pro-choice. If you make the personal decision to take a substance as part of your recovery, that is your personal decision\'85 Don't let them pigeonhole us, as in some kind of civil war between drugs and talk. Now, that's too simple.\
\
Mindfreedom International, the organization founded by Oaks in 1990, includes many members who self-identify as psychiatric survivors and anti-psychiatrists. Over the years Oaks has actively modified and softened his language, and his position has shifted to become more inclusive, embodying the movement's emerging values. By 2006, Oaks was saying, "our social change movement must avoid the blind alley of fighting over an individual's personal and private choices." (Oaks, 2006a).\
\
Many sub-networks of psychiatric survivors I encountered insulate themselves within ideological monocultures that mirror psychiatry's monocultures. It is hard for these survivors to acknowledge that psychiatrists or drugs ever help anyone, and they systematically block out or refute all testimony to the contrary. These attitudes parallel the psychiatric monocultures that dogmatically deny psychiatry's harm, see biological sickness and disease wherever they look, and push pharmaceuticals as first line treatment. These positions may sound like straw man arguments, but they currently dominate too much of the debate.\
\
The rally at the Friends Center was powerful and emotional, and set the tone for the rest of the weekend's protest. The format of the rally encouraged speakers to share their personal stories, and many opened their talks with intimate accounts of their experiences with psychiatry and emotional crises. The poignancy of their speeches helps us understand the tension and abrasive exchanges that developed in the Radical Caucus.\
}