{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Hey, Hey APA!#\
\
After the rally the protestors assembled in the Friends Center courtyard exchanging greetings, drawing last-minute protest signs and preparing for the march. One of my favorite signs read "Oppositionally Defiant Sign". One of the organizers distributed T-shirts with a dazed and doped cartoon figure, emblazoned with the word \'96 Psychopharmacopia. On the back the term was defined:\
\
>Psychopharmacomania is a mental or emotional disorder caused by ingestion of too much end product of the psychopharmacological digestive tract. It results in permanent psychosis, intractable depression or brain damage, depending on which drug rep reaches your doctor first!\
\
The protestors marched through downtown Philadelphia ending across the street from the conference center. A few curious conference attendees inquired about the protestor's message and demands, although most deliberately avoided eye-contact and walked by without engaging. I struck up a conversation with a group of two medical students and their mentor, who were finishing their psychiatric residencies in New York. They explained to me that their only encounters with the mentally ill were in hospital settings, during acute crises. They never had the opportunity to talk to patients in any other context and were largely unaware of mental health rights movements, outside of a vague caricature of anti-psychiatry. The residents believed that all activists critical of psychiatry held na\'efve views about mental illness, and denied the suffering and illness they witnessed daily. They shared a suspicion with the activists towards the profit motives of the Pharmaceutical industry, but were unaware of the range of beliefs and sophisticated critiques within the mad movement. An activist I later shared this exchange with remarked that it was easy to understand how these doctors' limited exposure to the lives of their patients outside of crisis restricts their ability to appreciate the long-term impact of their treatments. It was easy to imagine how this inhibited them from recognizing the toxic mixture of help and harm inflicted by their profession in the name of healing.\
\
The protesters delivered more short speeches over bullhorns, and continued the chants and songs heard throughout the march:\
\
>"What do we want? Human Rights! When do we want them? Now!"\
\
>"Hey, Hey APA\'85 How many shots did you force today?"\
\
>"Hey, Hey APA\'85 How many kids did you kill today?"\
\
The label ripping ceremony was embraced enthusiastically. Dozens of activists lined up holding pieces of paper with diagnostic labels, and one by one proclaimed independence from the labels and reclaimed authorship of their own identities.\
\
>"Fuck the labels!"\
\
>"This is not me!"\
\
>"I'm a patient, not a diagnosis. And, I have a voice!"\
\
>"I am not a label!"\
\
>"Label jars, not people!"\
\
>"I live, I love, I'm passionate, I'm a songwriter, I'm a singer, and I'm not a label!"\
\
The action was filmed by activists, journalists and documentary filmmakers, but due to the location of the protest, few conference attendees witnessed the live ceremony. The complete rally, march and protest were published on YouTube on the PsychRights channel, and the label ripping ceremony was covered by the Philadelphia Inquirer (Burling, 2012) and incorporated by the BBC Newshour in their coverage of the APA (Marshall, 2012).\
\
After the label ripping ceremony, the protest slowly dispersed. The organizers considered the day's actions to be a phenomenal success. Organizers I spoke with remarked that the turnout was larger than anticipated, the media coverage more extensive, and the enthusiasm and participation was higher than an average APA protest.\
}