{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Imagining a Different Future#\
\
A smaller number of activists remained in Philadelphia overnight, many of them planning to attend another event organized by mental health activists entitled "Imagining a Different Future". This event was held on Sunday, May 6th and featured keynote addresses by Jim Gottstein, attorney and founder of the Law Project for Psychiatric Rights and Robert Whitaker, journalist and author of _Mad In America_ and _Anatomy of an Epidemic_. The keynotes were followed by a question and answer session facilitated by Joseph Rogers, executive director of National Mental Health Consumers' Self-Help Clearinghouse. Gottstein's keynote repeated some of the information he presented at Saturday's rally, but his message was broader and included a call for the creation of more alternatives that would enable the courts to direct patients to services outside the mainstream. Without these alternatives, consumers and the justice system have very little choices for dealing with crises. Whitaker, who was not present for the rally or the march, presented his moving and informative stump speech that summarized many of the findings in his books. An award winning investigative journalist, Whitaker's most recent book was titled _Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric Drugs, and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in America_ which was awarded the Investigative Reporters and Editors (IRE) prize for the best investigative reporting book of 2010. Whitaker documents the worsening of long-term outcomes for mentally ill patients treated with medication. Through meta-studies and rich anecdotal data, he documents an "iatrogenic epidemic", one caused by the treatment itself. He finds damning evidence of the long-term detrimental effects of the new generation of so-called "atypical" anti-psychotics, called atypical due to researchers' initial beliefs about their reduced side-effects. Through a thorough review of meta-studies, Whitaker shows that patients who were taken off of this class of drugs have much better long-term prognosis than those who take them chronically. In particular, in poor countries with limited psychiatric services, the longitudinal outcomes for patients are significantly better than in countries where aggressive treatment of patients with antipsychotics is common. In countries like the US, where chronic treatment with antipsychotics is the norm, patients are more likely to experience relapse, brain damage, and reduced life-spans. They are also much less likely to reintegrate into society, as measured by employment and independence from social services. The _New Scientist_ review of _Anatomy of an Epidemic_ characterized Whitaker's argument as follows:\
\
>Whitaker wants us to believe psychiatry itself is to blame, and that scientific incompetence and corrupting self-interest have prevented reliable assessments of mental disorders and treatments alike. The author's belief that we could have got it so wrong seems far-fetched. Up close, however, his arguments are worryingly sane and consistently based on evidence. They amount to a provocative yet reasonable thesis, one whose astonishing intellectual punch is delivered with the gripping vitality of a novel. (Burch, 2010)\
\
A few members of the APA's "Radical Caucus" attended these talks, and afterward they extended an invitation to the protesters to join the Radical Caucus' yearly meeting the following day.\
}