{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Now in 3D!#\
\
In addition to Sunday's event at the church, I also participated directly in the APA conference itself. One of the panels I attended was entitled "The Contributions of Brain Imaging to the Study of Psychosis", chaired by Raquel E. Gur, Professor of Psychiatry Neurology and Radiology at the University of Pennsylvania's school of medicine. The panel included talks exploring the use of brain imaging to differentiate schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (Keshavan, 2012), another presenting correlations between working memory and prodromal psychosis (Seidman, 2012), and Gur's talk on brain function in psychosis-prone youth (2012). Notably, all of the panelists' presentations included their research on predicting and identifying prodromal risk, even though this aspect was absent from the panel's title.\
\
Seidman's talk included a primer on "traits", a construct that researchers postulated that was meant to capture a predisposition for a certain behavior. The researchers affirmed the existence of traits regardless of whether the behavior had ever been exhibited, a suspiciously counterfactual definition. Traits are the ideal vehicle for "prodromal" diagnoses \'96 they feel custom-made to explain the tendency or propensity for a disease that only exists in potential, and has never been expressed. I learned that despite the APA's insistence that prodromal diagnosis had been relegated to the appendix of DSM-5, research within this paradigm has proceeded for over a decade and the trend is only growing.\
\
In the exhibition hall, drug companies, medical equipment manufacturers and publishers hawked their wares and vied to leave memorable impressions. I have visited similar exhibition halls at technology conferences, and the extravagant opulence at this event made the tech expos look impoverished in comparison. Due to statutes banning gifts to physicians introduced in Minnesota and Massachusetts (Grande, 2010), the vendors were wary about the giveaways they could dispense, although it was left up to the attendees to self-identify as residents of the regulated states. At one lavish espresso bar, recipients of the espresso needed to sign a paper affirming that they did not practice in those states.\
\
One prominent installation in the center of the hall continuously looped a three-dimensional educational film depicting a neurological reaction. Participants donned 3D glasses to watch the active pharmaceutical agent repair the broken brain chemistry, entirely devoid of the brain's host, or his or her context. Another vendor hawked psychiatric malpractice insurance. Dark humor abounded, as electroshock devices on display were hooked up to stuffed animals in a display of gross insensitivity.\
\
One of the most notable experiences was the AstroZeneca installation. AstroZeneca, the makers of the anti-psychotic Seroquel (_quetiapine fumarate_), had a large pavilion. I signed up for a presentation that was delivered by a Key Opinion Leader, or KOL. KOL's are psychiatrists hired by the pharmaceutical companies to pitch their wares, a practice motivated by the assumption that doctors respond better to other doctors than to salespeople without medical degrees, a notion validated by studies (Elliot, 2010). KOLs are paid on average tens thousands of dollars per year (MarketWire, 2008; Dollars for Doctors, n.d.), and are often provided with precise scripts that they must read verbatim. During the presentation I attended, an AstroZeneca representative with a clipboard stood at the back of the small crowd scribbling extensive notes on a detailed checklist. The evaluator attentively monitored the performance, and the KOL regularly glanced his way, seeking approval. The presentation I attended started in one corner of the pavilion, and about half a dozen other doctors attended the presentation. The presenter talked for a few minutes over a slide show while we stood listening, asked us for questions, and then guided us to another corner of the pavilion where she resumed her presentation where she had left off. We made our way to all four corners of the pavilion, and I was left puzzled by the act of delivering the pitch from these four different locations. The explanation for this format could be as simple as flow control, allowing multiple groups through the pavilion in parallel, but the experience of standing and then relocating to a new station also reminded me of medical grand rounds. I wondered if this resemblance was deliberate, meant to lend credibility and authority to the presentation through a subtle subconscious association.\
\
My experience walking the halls of the APA reminded me of the system's vast resources and the challenges that reform faces. The sheer capital and marketing muscle was fully evident, as was the entrenchment around the paradigm and language. While there was a streak of skepticism among a small percentage of participants, too many accepted the status quo, and the few who acknowledged the protesters joked about them and dismiss their claims.\
}