{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #The Radical Caucus Ruckus#\
\
One immediate outcome of the weekend's actions was that a group of psychiatrists self-identified as the Radical Caucus invited the protestors to their annual meeting. The meeting was held during the APA in a conference room at a Courtyard Marriott, one block from the convention center. The meeting of the Radical Caucus was not part of the official APA program, but the group had been meeting for years on this occasion. The meeting was followed by an informal dinner at an upscale Cuban restaurant, and the activists were also invited to attend.\
\
The Radical Caucus meeting was the culmination of the weekend protests. It offers a distillation of this dissertation's central contention that un-credentialed stakeholders are systematically silenced, even by their purported allies within the establishment. The clash that followed encapsulates this dynamic, from agenda setting to solidarity around substantive issues, and demonstrates the deep rift in trust that decades of trauma and abuse have created. Although many of the psychiatrists in the room have published peer-reviewed papers advocating positions that are sympathetic to movement causes, actualizing those positions proved challenging in practice.\
\
The meeting was recorded by a documentary crew working on a transmedia project called _Cause of Death: Unknown_ (Hoel, in press). Andrew Grant, the film's producer, graciously provided me with complete footage of the meeting, which I used as the basis for this analysis. Grant and Anniken Hoel are working on a film that tells the story of Anniken's sister, Renate Hoel, who died suddenly and unexpectedly while under psychiatric treatment for a condition diagnosed as schizophrenia. The autopsy declared her cause of death unknown, and Anniken's investigation of her sister's death has led her on a decade long investigation of the global pharmaceutical industry. Their crew gathered footage at the APA protests and conference throughout the weekend.\
\
The initial call for the meeting was focused on discussing the relationship between economic disparity and mental illness:\
\
>The Radical Caucus of Members of the APA invites everyone to a meeting to discuss how to make psychiatry and the APA more relevant to the people of this country\'85 Although biomedical research is important, there is ample evidence that economic conditions account for much more of the "explained variance" in mental illness than any single genetic factor.  This nation can do considerably more for public mental health if there are serious efforts to redistribute wealth through tax restructuring, providing foreclosure relief, creating jobs programs, and enhancing public investment. Let's discuss what we can do. Please join us. Everyone is welcome.\
\
Dr. Carl Cohen, a psychiatrist with a New York practice, distributed this invitation over email in the days before the conference, and facilitated the gathering. Cohen is a middle-aged New Yorker with a Brooklyn accent and a soft laugh. Cohen is intelligent and caring, with a warm demeanor in one-on-one encounters, but he was unable to command a strong presence once the meeting became contentious. His weak facilitation skills contributed to the confusion that unfolded.\
\
According to Cohen, the Radical Caucus started in 1968, and was "organized in Miami around the anti-war protest in the late 60s". When the anti-war movement died out, so did the radical caucus. It was reformed in 1979 in San Francisco where they "brought together a lot of people in the Bay Area to talk about radical perspectives on psychiatry." For years, the Radical Caucus meetings were essentially dinners that a small number of like-minded psychiatrists attended. They did not publish statements or press releases, and were largely a footnote to the APA proceedings. Cohen continued to describe the groups activity: "Periodically, we've done some various critiques of the biomedical approach in psychiatry, we've dealt with torture victims and immigrant populations, joblessness and various economic issues, consumer rights, global psychiatry, and I think most of the topics related to biological reductionism, consumer issues, psychiatric abuse, socio-economical and cultural issues. I think that about sums it up. We've been probably more intellectual than active, although many of us have been active on our own."\
\
Cohen spent about five minutes framing the meeting, explaining the agenda of the meeting was intended to "[deal] with the fact that psychiatry has typically been ignoring many of the severe economic problems in this country\'85 [since] we know that income disparities create problems in health and mental health, and as well as mortality." Cohen hoped the group would "come up with some statements about it and then some action plans, either to present to the APA and beyond." Cohen introduced Dr. Duncan White, a psychiatrist practicing in Maine, "who has been very interested in topics of economic disparity and economic inequality."\
}