{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Seats at the Proverbial Table#\
\
The participant's questions brought up issues relating to universal health care, corruption and greed in the insurance and pharmaceutical industries, and economic issues resulting in unemployment and the housing crisis. These issues all had an impact on society's mental health, and some of the meeting attendees wanted to call on the APA to take a public position on these policy issues. Like the mental health professionals in Zuccotti Park, they were prepared to critique the external forces of capitalism and policy, but had a very difficult time holding the mirror up to themselves, and critiquing their own profession and practices. The activists in the room thought the caucus was externalizing the problems and evading issues that psychiatry was directly responsible for.\
\
A few participants tried to bring the focus of the conversation back to psychiatry's responsibilities. Frank Blakenship, a long-time Mindfreedom member, raised concerns about the "emphasis on the insurance company\'85 given the amount of iatrogenic disease there is in the psychiatric field". He questioned the emphasis on insurance coverage instead of the damage that psychiatric drugs caused (he was also concerned that insurance companies would not cover the treatment for damage these drugs caused). Dr. Brad Lewis raised the issue of medicine becoming increasingly unaffordable, which in turn has pushed "more people off the insurance roles". He described how doctors have been complicit in designing practices and treatments that are unaffordable and unsustainable, and practitioners shared some of the responsibility for reduced access to services.\
\
Andrew Grant, the documentary producer filming the meeting, prodded the audience: "How do you all feel about the proposed changes to the DSM, that are only going to classify more people in our society as mentally ill?" His question was applauded.\
\
A young psychiatrist named Margaret Balfour responded:\
\
I just finished my training a year ago\'85I started off as a researcher\'85. I used to think the DSM was very important and when people didn't stick to the criteria it annoyed me\'85. As I gained more experience, I found them to be less important\'85 To label everybody and diagnose it [is] not useful\'85.I don't think we've learned enough to have a whole new book, and it's probably not gonna be that useful in actual clinical practice. But it's gonna generate a whole lot of discussion and controversy and money.\
\
}