{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Involuntary Votes##\
\
A member of the radical caucus tried to recognize and diffuse some of the tension in the room. He acknowledged the pain and trauma of some of the participants, and apologized to them on behalf of his profession. He then became quite defensive, and insisted that his practice was collaborative and not oppressive.\
\
One of the psychiatrists described the tension in the meeting as disorganizing, and unhelpful. An activist responded that it has to be disorganizing, and that "there's going to be tension because people are dying". Another activist corroborated this sentiment, explaining that he was enraged since "we have people who have forced electroshock at the age of six, solitary confinement, tardive dyskinesia, still from the atypicals [anti-psychotics]."\
\
Oaks jumped in and compared the APA to the Catholic Church, likening the cover-ups of psychiatric abuse to the Church's cover-ups of child abuse. He expressed that he expected the radical caucus to "be able to handle the anger", and was also "tired of hearing allies who say behind my closed doors 'I'm so great with patients\'85 things are getting better, and everything'. Where the hell is your letter to the editor about forced electroshock?" This stream of consciousness led to the meeting's next twist, with Oaks calling for an impromptu vote on the opposition to involuntary electroshock:\
\
>If this place is truly a radical caucus, right now I ought to be able to say\'85 that we are opposed to involuntary electroshock over the expressed wishes of the subject\'85 Are people opposed to involuntary electroshock over the expressed wishes of the subject? ... The same position as the world health organization\'85\
\
Dr. David Pollack began losing his temper, and started yelling over Oaks in a cross tone, "David, David, David you be quiet for a minute please!" Oaks accused Pollack of interrupting the vote because he was afraid to see it's outcome, but Pollack insisted he was just trying to follow the meeting protocols. Oaks accused Pollack of calling his behavior "inappropriate", a loaded clinical term that is often used when diagnosing psychotic behavior. Pollack denied calling Oaks "inappropriate", but characterized his behavior as "rude". Oaks volunteered to stop speaking after pointing out that "his silencing" began when he asked for a vote on "forced electroshock over the expressed interest of the subject". Pollack replies to Oaks that he "appreciate[s his] position" but he "resent[s his] style". Pollack went on to assert that "the psychiatrists who are here are the kinds of radical community based psychiatrists, who basically are in line with everything that you all have been saying." He claimed he would have voted against forced electroshock, but he resented the process Oaks employed to initiate the vote. He defended approaching the issues from the vantage point of social and economic abstractions covered at the beginning of the meeting, since "these health systems that are extremely flawed to try to raise consciousness, improve things not in a piecemeal or patchwork way, but to it in a way that will hopefully lead to better results." Finally, Pollack turns the tables on Oaks and asks him to respect the pain that psychiatrists struggle with: "We are limited in terms of our power, to do things in all the ways that we think we would like to. So, we have to struggle with that. We struggle with that pain that we feel, and we think that you should respect in some ways that pain as well as we respecting the pain and the trauma that you've felt."\
\
The meeting had devolved into bickering, and at stake were its substance, format, and especially agenda setting. The organizers of the Radical Caucus had made the mistake of starting out the meeting by "talking at" the activists they invited. The professionals had a difficult time listening to the activists' concerns and adjusting their program to address them. Instead, they largely replicated the doctor-patient power dynamic, setting the agenda, lecturing to the room, and relegating questions to a supplementary but secondary question and answer period. Their defensiveness was particularly off-putting to the activists. While the activists weren't accusing anyone present at the meeting of malfeasance or malpractice, they would have been more reassured by support and solidarity from within the establishment. Dr. Brad Lewis, cultural theorist and psychiatrist questioned the defensiveness of the psychiatrists present and called on them to work directly on developing alternative treatment models:\
\
>Why are the psychiatrists so nervous and defensive?... I try to do the best I can with my patients, but I'm not defensive that people are really mad about where psychiatry is going\'85 Why does that make the radical people nervous?... I think that somehow they feel they're being blamed\'85We need alternatives to hospitalizations\'85 we need mutual aid programs [and] opportunities, we need alternatives to the drugging\'85 And once that begins to happen then you begin to start seeing the court start sending people there, and you also begin to see that changing people's mind.\
\
One activists I spoke with referred to the psychiatrist who was proud of his practice and made the comment "I don't happen to be at that point when people wind up in that state. You all think that there's no such thing, but I don't want to go there". Here, the psychiatrist meant that he does not typically treat patients undergoing acute emotional crisis in his practice, thereby avoiding situations that might warrant coercive treatment. Some psychiatrists avoid taking patients with more extreme case histories, and primarily treat patients with milder disorders. The activist found his aside\'97"You all think there's no such thing"\'97to be particularly infuriating, since it was based on a flawed assumption that lumped together all opposition to psychiatry as orthodox anti-psychiatry, denying the existence of acute crises warranting psychiatric support or intervention. The way this assertion was formulated felt like it shut down all debate, and was understood as a swipe at the legitimacy of the activists in the room.\
\
As the meeting drew to a close, Cohen summarized the proceedings, and enumerated the issues the group had raised: 1) "The pharmaceutical industries, it's connections with the economy, and the influence of that industry on psychiatry"; 2) "The insurance companies'\'85 denial of care", and the privatization of Medicaid and Medicare; 3) Concerns over the "national database for psychiatric patients"; 4) Advocating for a single payer system and universal health care; 5) Campaign finance reform; 6) Creating "change on an individual level"; 7) Working to create more treatment alternatives; 8) The "problem" of the DSM manual\'97"Should we be advocating just the abolition of classification systems altogether?"; 9) "The strained systems that we have and the reduced time for patients"; and, 10) Creating coalitions and alliances with activists and the UK's Critical Psychiatry.\
\
David Oaks responded once more, indignant that the question of forced electroshock was omitted:\
\
>I could have sworn that involuntary electroshock over the express issues of the subject came up\'85 You need a different committee. You need an activist human rights committee\'85 You're silencing me\'85 Everybody is complicit when there's silence. Not just the abusers, the silencers are complicit\'85 A laundry list isn't real activism. If you want a real action plan, take one thing to do. I think its time to start a new caucus.\
\
The Radical Caucus is comprised of well-intentioned psychiatrists, trying in earnest to affect change in their profession and taking a stand against inequality. The deep miscalculation exposed at this meeting was the ways that both camps developed their priorities in isolation, and did not consult with the stakeholders at the other end of the prescription pad. If the Radical Caucus had attended the morning rally, or the label ripping ceremony, or opened the meeting with introductions and an open question around the most important issues one people's minds, the meeting would most likely have unfolded differently. Similarly, many of the activists were unaware of the existence of the Radical Caucus before that weekend, and had done little to research or understand their history or priorities. The issues raised by the Radical Caucus were all important, and largely aligned with the activists' values, but not their priorities.\
\
The tensions that surfaced at this meeting were disconcerting, but unsurprising. Although the radical caucus had invited the protestors to their meeting, they were not invited as first-class participants, nor were the psychiatrists fully prepared to listen to their criticisms and acknowledge their pain without becoming defensive. The protesters also should have also arrived better prepared, with a better understanding of the Radical Caucus' membership and their planned agenda. The clash of expectations around the presentation format exacerbated the tensions, and helped lead to increased hostility and the breakdown in communication. Coming into the meeting, trust between participants was fragile, at best. This tension should have been acknowledged, and attempts to diffuse it instead of deny it could have led to a more productive exchange.\
\
Analogous to psychiatry's tendency to command their patients' personal narratives and choose labels for them, the Radical Caucus asserted the agenda of resistance without consulting with the people subject to the brunt of forms of treatment they regard as oppression. They swooped in to address extreme poverty, and tried to make a compelling case for the relationship between poverty and mental illness, but neglected the immediate and pressing concerns of the protestors who had traveled from around the country to express their frustrations at the APA. The protesters also squandered an opportunity to cultivate allies, and allowed their mistrust and hostility towards the entire profession cloud their judgment. The meeting participants had far more in common with each other than the fireworks suggest, and all parties can learn a great deal from The Icarus Project's meeting agreements that we will encounter in the next chapter. In particular, everyone at this meeting should have listened more, paid more attention to repeating patterns and "listened like allies." The meeting would have greatly benefited from stipulating meeting agreements at the start, to help set more uniform expectations within the group over communicative protocols.\
\
}