{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Conclusion#\
\
The 2012 American Psychiatric Association conference was a pivotal moment in the evolution of the mad movement. With the release of the DSM-5, the NIMH's shift away from the DSM and a growing surge of criticism of mainstream psychiatry, a new generation of activists took steps toward finding a new voice and a new message. This message is still being formulated and refined, but at its core it is a recapitulation of the refrain, "Nothing about us without us".\
\
Although this argument was implied it was never explicitly spoken. "Nothing about us without us" is a formulation that is evocative and clear, but mad activists {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://39E1D37E-3D42-4317-ACF6-B888E8F3A20D"}}{\fldrslt have yet to fully embrace this slogan as their own}}. Throughout my fieldwork, I uncovered no opposition to this slogan, or to greater solidarity with the larger disability rights movement. Rather, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://80DD0020-2347-4075-A64A-19593B489755"}}{\fldrslt I think}} the mad activists are still evolving the ways they theorize and conceptualize their positions. Instead of claiming the oppositional stance of anti-psychiatry, the new wave of mad activists demand participatory authorship over their identities and personal narratives. To me, this move closely echoes the demands of the disability rights movement, and the new wing of the mad movement is on the verge of arriving at this understanding and explicitly embracing these politics.\
\
Elements of the mad movement are also starting to demand seats at various tables of power, including the tables of academia, the tables of public policy, and the tables where diagnosis is defined and treatment is determined. The meeting of the Radical Caucus shows how much work lies ahead in overcoming these divides. Many of the doctors at the meeting believed themselves to be good people, trying their best to help their patients. They differentiated themselves from the "bad" psychiatrists, whom they vilified as greedy and corrupt. As a group, they externalized the problems in the system by blaming the forces of government regulation, insurance and pharmaceutical corporations and structural inequality. They had difficulty recognizing their own power within the APA, and understanding how their daily practice might help improve conditions through the creation of alternatives to mainstream treatment. The activists struggled to be heard, throwing a veritable tantrum when they did not get the attention they wanted, and practically inviting themselves to be ignored as a result. Their demand to be involved in agenda setting, and to participate in setting priorities is reasonable. However, their tactics may have been counter-productive and to be taken more seriously as equal stakeholders, they too must learn to listen more closely to the fears and desires of their potential allies.\
\
Agenda setting and consensus building need to be shared across much wider constituencies to fully realize a more ethical coalition. Future meetings of the Radical Caucus ought to expand this coalition even wider, inviting senior citizens, veterans, prisoners and children's rights activists to represent their voices and concerns. All of these groups are facing an onslaught of psychiatric attention and it is crucial for them to figure out how to effectively communicate and work together to respond to this offensive.\
}