{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Bad Pharma#\
\
Doctors, academics and journalists have written extensive accounts of disturbing trends in pharmaceutical expansion, and here I will only try to summarize this history in broad strokes. In 2004, Marcia Angell, an American physician, Harvard lecturer, and the first female Editor-in-Chief of the _New England Journal of Medicine_, published a book titled _The Truth about the Drug Companies: How They Deceive Us and What to Do about It_ (2004)_._ She described watching the drug companies stray from their original mission to discover healing drugs and become "vast marketing machines" with "nearly limitless influence over medical research, education, and how doctors do their jobs". David Healy is an Irish psychiatrist and researcher who studies the relationship between antidepressants and suicide, as well as conflicts of interest between pharmaceutical companies and academic researchers. _Pharmegeddon,_ his most recent book, forcefully argues that drug companies' drive for profits has led them to overhype the benefits of their products and downplay their risks, often with deadly consequences (2012). Most provocatively, Peter G\'f8tzsche, a Danish physician and researcher, and former sales representative for AstraZeneca, convincingly compares the pharmaceutical industry to organized crime syndicates in his book, _Deadly Medicines and Organized Crime: How Big Pharma Has Corrupted Healthcare_ (2013)_._ Drawing on published studies and numerous anecdotes, he describes an "extraordinary system failure caused by widespread crime, corruption, bribery and impotent drug regulation". These books are just a sampling from the long list of works detailing Pharma's bad faith (Kassirer, 2005; Goldacre, 2012). Taken together they demonstrate the urgency for industry regulation to correct this behavior, and a complete reexamination of how psychiatric knowledge is assembled and evaluated; the lack of any meaningful policy reform helps explain the rise in organized resistance.\
\
In 2002, Americans spent $200 billion on prescription drugs, and this number has been growing at about twelve percent a year (Angell, 2004). The World Health Organization valued the global pharmaceutical market at $300 billion in 2015, and expects this to rise to $400 billion by 2018 (WHO, n.d.). The market is highly concentrated and the top ten pharmaceutical companies control over one-third of the market, with more than $10 billion per year in sales and thirty percent profit margins (WHO, 2015). In 2010, psychiatric medications were the second-best-selling class of drugs that year, their sales amounting to a combined total of 50 billion dollars (Healy, 2012).\
\
In the five years between 1996 and 2001, the number of prescriptions for psychiatric drugs increased twenty percent per year, resulting in an increase of 5.5 million Americans, and the numbers continue to climb (Zuvekas, 2005). In 2011 Medco Health Solutions published _America's State of Mind_ (2011), reporting that the number of insured Americans taking medications to treat psychological behavioral disorders had risen to more than 1-in-5 by 2010, an increase of 22% since 2001. The report also showed that more women took drugs for mental health conditions than men, prescriptions to children and the elderly continued to rise, and the use of atypical anti-psychotics soared to 3-4 times its previous rates. In 2009, a study showed that poor children with Medicaid coverage were four times more likely to be prescribed anti-psychotics than a child with private insurance (Crystal, Olfson, Huang, Pincus & Gerhard, 2009).\
\
According to the Roper Center's opinion polls about public attitudes towards mental health, the general population continues to perceive a stigma around mental illness (77% in 1978 compared to 82% in 2002, although in 2004, 55% claimed that the stigma around depression had been significantly lifted), and psychiatrists' reputation for honesty and integrity is significantly lower than other medical doctors, nurses, pharmacists and dentists (Roper Center, 2015). Many believe that, as a society, we are increasingly overmedicated, but the complexity of the political economy driving this expansion and the sophisticated ways this growth is instrumented are easily underestimated (Whitaker, 2010; G\'f8tzsche, 2013; Frances, 2014a).\
\
This remarkable growth can be traced to the increasing market pressure to create "blockbuster" drugs, defined as drugs whose yearly sales exceed one billion dollars. Blockbuster drugs commonly treat conditions such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure, asthma, diabetes and cancer, and some of the biggest blockbuster drugs are psychotropic (Greenberg, 2008; Herzberg, 2008). Anti-depressants were the first psychotropic drugs to join the billion dollar blockbuster club, with the tricyclic Miltown (_meprobamate_) leading the charge in the 1950s, followed by Valium (_diazepam_) in the 1970s, and Prozac (_fluoxetine_) and Paxil (_paroxetine_) in the 1980s (Herzberg, 2008). The "off-label" use of these drugs contributed significantly to their spectacular success. The term "off-label" is applied to prescriptions made outside the range of FDA approved uses of a drug. Doctors are permitted by law to prescribe any medication they believe is medically appropriate, to anyone, for any condition; however, the FDA must approve a drug for a particular condition and population before the pharmaceutical companies are allowed to market that drug for that usage.\
\
Blockbuster profits spur aggressive tactics for drug companies to expand their bottom line and they exploit the regulatory environment to continue this growth. Drug company charters do not contain anything like the Hippocratic Oath's adage to "do no harm", and their only obligation is to maximize shareholder value within the parameters of the law. They advertise to doctors and directly to consumers, pursue aggressive legal strategies to protect and extend their intellectual property, and manage sophisticated marketing campaigns that include funding research, journals, conferences and sponsorships (Huskamp, 2006; Peterson, 2008; Lane, 2008).\
\
The role of advertising and mass marketing in the creation of blockbuster diseases and drugs has been widely investigated and researched, but is still under-appreciated. Melody Petersen, a New York Times reporter who spent over four years on the pharmaceutical beat, published a book in 2008 called _Our Daily Meds: How the Pharmaceutical Companies Transformed Themselves Into Slick Marketing Machines and Hooked the Nation on Prescription Drugs_. In _Our Daily Meds_ she details a 17-fold increase in spending on prescription drugs (for all categories) between 1980 and 2003 (Petersen, 2008). In his book _Shyness: How Normal Behavior Became a Sickness_ Christopher Lane documents the sharp rise in disease and drug marketing, with many pharmaceutical product's marketing budgets dwarfing the marketing budgets of Hollywood blockbusters (Lane, 2008). The United States is the only country other than New Zealand where it is legal for pharmaceutical companies to advertise their branded products directly to consumers. Canada allows ads that mention the product or the indication, but not both, and the European Parliament has repeatedly rejected attempts to allow direct to consumer pharmaceutical advertising, even in the form of "information to patients" (Ventola, 2011). In New Zealand, the government is under intense pressure from consumers and professionals to ban the practice (Ministry of Health, 2006).\
\
Direct to consumer advertising became legal in the US in 1985, and really took off in 1997 when the FDA relaxed the requirement to list all side-effects. A content analysis of television commercials in 2007 found that few ads (26%) described causes, risk factors or prevalence, some (18%) portrayed lifestyle changes as insufficient for change, and almost all (95%) included emotional appeals (Frosch, Krueger, Hornik, Cronholm, & Barg, 2007). The title of their paper captures the authors' argument: _Creating Demand for Prescription Drugs: A Content Analysis of Television Direct-to-Consumer Advertising_.\
\
When it comes to mental and lifestyle illnesses, pharmaceutical companies seem to be in the business of manufacturing illnesses for which they also conveniently sell the cure. For example, the 2007 documentary _Does Your Soul Have a Cold?_ tells the story of the aggressive, wholesale export of Western definitions of depression to Japan, a culture with alternative understandings and interpretations of social norms (Mills, 2007). Mike Mills, the film's director, traveled frequently to Japan and remembers feeling surprised when his Japanese friend shamelessly took an anti-depressant in front of him (Big Screen Little Screen, 2007). Mills' film explores the effects of globalization on Japanese culture, which traditionally encouraged the acceptance of suffering and sadness, and frowned upon the pursuit of happiness.\
\
Mills began researching the popularization of mild depression in Japan, spurred by a New York Times article titled "Did Antidepressants Depress Japan?" (Schulz, 2004). What he learned inspired him to create a film documenting the lives of five people living with "_kokoro no kaze_" (soul colds). "_Kokoro_ _no_ _kaze_" is a marketing slogan invented by GlaxoSmithKline to avoid the stigma of the word "_utsubyo_", the clinical term for severe depression. According to Doug Berger, medical director of the Tokyo Meguro Counseling Center and a consultant to the Japanese pharmaceutical industry, Japan's "lucrative market" was "significantly lagging" behind western countries in their introduction of psychiatric medications (Berger, 2005). Tooru Takahashi, a psychiatrist who worked for Japan's National Institute of Mental Health for 30 years, explained, "Melancholia, sensitivity, fragility \'97 these are not negative things in a Japanese context. It never occurred to us that we should try to remove them, because it never occurred to us that they were bad." (Schulz, 2004). In her article, Kathryn Schultz interviewed Koji Nakagawa, a product manager for GlaxoSmithKline's blockbuster antidepressant Paxil. Nakagawa explained that direct-to-consumer advertising was illegal in Japan, but the company exploited a loophole and relied on educational campaigns targeting mild depression. He elaborated, "People didn't know they were suffering from a disease. We felt it was important to reach out to them." GlaxoSmithKline formulated a simple message: "Depression is a disease that anyone can get. It can be cured by medicine. Early detection is important." (Schulz, 2004).\
\
The introduction of western norms around depression and sadness is not unique to Japan. Laurence Kirmayer, director of the Social and Transcultural Psychiatry division at McGill's Trauma and Global Health program, published a paper in the _Journal of Clinical Psychiatry_ on cultural variations in depression and anxiety. He concludes:\
\
>In most parts of the world, people with symptoms related to depression and anxiety do not view their problems as psychiatric... Assuming that psychiatry does have something to offer such patients (this is not certain, but is at least worth testing), the clinician's task involves acquiring sufficient understanding of the patient's point of view and preferences... not only of a patient's ethnocultural backgrounds, but the structure of the health care system they find themselves in and the diagnostic categories and concepts they encounter in mass media and in dialogue with family, friends, and clinicians. (2001)\
\
In the U.S., direct-to-consumer and direct-to-doctor advertising and marketing campaigns continue because they are unregulated, and they work. Direct-to-consumer pharmaceutical advertising is the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://A4E01AC7-ED27-490D-8372-B57DD01643F9"}}{\fldrslt most prominent}} type of health communication that the American public encounters (Ventola, 2011). The pharmaceutical companies continue to innovate around peddling influence and persuasion with incredibly subtle and sophisticated marketing efforts. There is an urgent need for more research, regulation and literacy campaigns around the persuasive tactics employed in the marketing of disorders and blockbuster drugs worldwide.\
\
Pharma's marketing campaigns extend beyond traditional blunt advertising, and are also designed to cultivate indirect influence. Pharma-funded speaking fees, research bounties and sponsored presentations generate influence and spawn serious conflicts of interest. ProPublica, "an independent, non-profit newsroom that produces investigative journalism in the public interest" produces an ongoing transparency project called "Dollars for Docs" that tracks the flow of industry dollars to doctors and other health professionals (Dollars for Docs, n.d.). Launched in 2010, Dollars for Docs now tracks over 4 billion dollars in payments to physicians from over 17 companies. Psychiatrists dominate this database, and they receive more money from drug companies than any other specialty (Wood & Lowes, 2010; Jones & Ornstein, 2015).\
\
To fully appreciate the financial motives behind the expansion into these new markets it is also essential to understand the role of intellectual property law in this information ecology. Pharmaceutical companies are granted patents on their discoveries, guaranteeing them a limited monopoly that is supposed to incentivize innovation. Putting aside the ethics of controlling potentially life-saving drugs, all of these patents eventually expire, falling off the so-called "patent cliff", leaving drug companies with a gaping shortfall in profits (Hari, 2009). Expanding the diagnostic criteria for treatments extends the patent clock, and gives drug companies more time to reap bumper profits from their drugs. For example, pediatric bipolar diagnoses were popularized just as some ADHD drugs were coming off patent, meaning generic versions would cut significantly into drug companies' blockbuster sales (DeRuiter & Holston, 2012). The popularization of this diagnosis helped make up for this shortfall by ushering in a surge of sales for atypical anti-psychotics. Anti-psychotics were still under patent, but in the late 1990s were prescribed primarily to the smaller population of schizophrenics. As anti-psychotics were approved to treat new disorders, like depression and bipolar, their patent clocks were reset, staving off the introduction of generic equivalents.\
\
The mid-1990s also marked the beginning of a pattern where drug companies illegally promoted their products off-label using a variety of techniques to suggest that a drug could be used to treat conditions that had not received FDA approval (Peterson, 2008). The statistics of off-label use are not readily available, but a 2006 study estimated that over 20 percent of all overall prescriptions are made off-label, while the percentage of off-label use for specific drugs, including anti-depressants, anti-convulsants and anti-psychotics might range as high as 50 percent (Radley, Finkelstein & Stafford). The authors of this study report that very little is known about the frequency of off-label prescriptions, and their methods relied upon analyzing a statistically representative sample of physician reported diagnoses alongside their prescriptions. If some doctors reported diagnoses tailored to match their prescriptions, these numbers may under-represent the occurrence off-label prescriptions. Obtaining FDA approval is an expensive and lengthy process, involving multiple rounds of human trials. Off-label prescriptions are common, and often some research has been conducted on the safety and effectiveness of a drug when used off-label.\
\
In 1996 David Franklin blew the whistle on Pfizer's off-label promotion of Neurotin (_gabapentin_), a drug approved to help control epileptic seizures that was being prescribed for bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, insomnia, restless legs syndrome, hot flashes and migraines with sales of $2.7 billion in 2003 (Angell, 2009). Pfizer paid academics to endorse off-label uses by attaching their names to journal articles where these uses were described, and by funding conferences where these off-label uses were presented. In a lawsuit filed in a Boston district court under the False Claims Act (2010), Pfizer settled for $430 million.\
\
The Neurotin case kicked off a string of lawsuits and record settlements: Bristol-Myers Squibb settled for $515 million (The US Department of Justice, 2007), Pfizer settled for $2.3 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2009), Eli Lilly settled for $1.415 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2009), AstraZeneca settled for $520 million (The US Department of Justice, 2010), Abbott Labs settled for $1.5 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2012), GlaxoSmithKline settled for $3 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2012), and Johnson and Johnson settled for $2.2 billion (The US Department of Justice, 2013). These settlements all involved similar infractions around the off-label marketing of their products, including the psychiatric drugs Abilify (_aripiprazole_), Godeon (_ziprasidone_), Zyprexa (_olanzapine_), Seroquel (_quetiapine_), Depakote (_divalproex sodium_), Paxil (_paroxetine_), and Risperdal (_risperidone_), respectively. While the settlements were astronomical, they were dwarfed by the drugs' profits, and industry analysts are unsure if the fines will deter future infractions. They may simply be considered the price of doing business (Bobelian, 2013).\
}