{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Early-onset misconduct#\
\
Zooming in from these broad highlights on the workings of the pharmaceutical industry, this past decade has witnessed a profound shift in our collective judgment of behavior in children in the U.S.,as childhood and risk itself are increasingly pathologized. The explosive rise in the controversial diagnosis of pediatric bipolar has received some coverage in the mainstream media, but these stories often serve to popularize the condition and neglect a deeper skepticism around its justification and treatment (Carey, 2007; Wallace-Well, 2009). Beyond prescribing kids Ritalin because they can't stop fidgeting, psychiatry has supplemented attention disorders with a more serious diagnosis and stronger, riskier treatments.With the profusion of bipolar diagnoses in children and its common treatment with powerful and dangerous atypical anti-psychotic medication, significant numbers of adolescents and teens are being chemically swaddled and sedated. Parents are under increasing pressure from teachers and other parents to "correct" their children's behavior with potent mind- and mood-altering drugs, often with devastating side-effects (Yan, 2008). Perhaps most worrisome is the growing tendency towards preventative treatment, and the call for earlier and earlier preemptive interventions before serious problems have manifested.\
\
In 1995, a team of researchers affiliated with Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital published a landmark paper arguing that early-onset bipolar was far more common than previously thought (Wozniak & Biederman, et al., 1995). Biederman and Wozniak, who helped redefine the disorder and were at the forefront of the popularization of early-onset bipolar, developed their hypothesis to help explain treatment-resistant children in Biederman's ADHD clinic. They noticed that many of the children who did not respond to standard ADHD medications exhibited anger issues, as well as child-parent interaction problems. The researchers wondered if these difficult to treat children were grappling with more serious mood disorders, not impulse control. These difficult cases did not respond to standard ADHD medications, but did respond to standard bipolar medications, leading the researchers to reconsider their diagnosis. Biederman characterizes the state of the children he treats as dire: "We need to treat these children. They are in a desperate state... It's not that somebody comes to me after their child has a temper tantrum. They do things for years that are dangerous. These are things that profoundly affect the child," such as putting at risk their academic record, substance abuse or even suicide (Allen, 2007).\
\
Psychiatric literature dating back to the 1920s documented a very small percentage of adult patients diagnosed with bipolar who recalled manic symptoms dating back to childhood. Child-onset mania was considered extremely rare. Wozniak and Biederman argue that, "juvenile mania may be common among referred children with severe psychopathology but that it may be difficult to diagnose". They point out that "developmental variations" have been made to accommodate the diagnosis of major depression in children, but that no such accommodations had been accepted for childhood mania. They proposed that the clinical picture of mania in children overlapped with the symptoms of Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), and was "predominantly irritable and mixed, and the course was chronic [instead of episodic]". They acknowledged that severe irritability was common in children, but differentiated "the type of irritability observed in our children with mania-like symptoms was very severe and often associated with violence\'85 assaultive when irritable\'85 resulting in throwing and breaking things, kicking down doors, and destroying property\'85 'affective storms'".\
\
Prominent psychiatrists also advanced theories that went beyond the diagnosis of existing symptoms. With rationales that echo the prodromal theories I will return to later this chapter, leading researchers advocated for the treatment and prevention of _future_ episodes. In 2002 Time magazine ran a cover story called "Young and Bipolar" (Kluger & Song) featuring Demitri Papolos, the research director of the Juvenile Bipolar Research Foundation and co-author of the bestselling book, _The Bipolar Child_ (Papolos & Papolos, 1999). Papolos, who believes a characteristic pattern in bipolar children is difficulty waking up in the morning says, "if you don't catch it early on it gets worse, like a tumor." Kiki Chang, the director of the pediatric bipolar-disorders program at Stanford says: "We are interested in looking at medication not just to treat and prevent future episodes, but also to get in early and \'97 this is the controversial part \'97 to prevent the manic episode." Chang explains the "kindling theory" of mania, as the justification for the urgency of prevention: "Once you've had a manic episode, you've already crossed the threshold, you've jumped off the bridge: it's done. The chances that you're going to have another episode are extremely high." (Egan, 2008). From the start, pediatric bipolar has been closely associated with preventative treatment and has incorporated the logic of prodromal diagnoses.\
\
The stakes of receiving this diagnosis are high. A psychiatric diagnosis is more than just an esoteric game of medical nosology. Bipolar is understood as a chronic, lifelong disorder, and children receiving this diagnosis are advised to continue pharmaceutical treatment for life. The first-line treatments for childhood bipolar are atypical-antipsychotics, drugs that have been shown to have dangerous side-effects including massive weight gain, metabolic disorders, tardive dyskinesia, and diabetes (\'dccok and Gaebel,2008; Yan, 2008). The first-line treatments for adult bipolar are the relatively safer mood stabilizers such as Lithium or Depakote (Kowatch, Strawn & Sorter, 2009).\
\
Not all psychiatrists agree with Biederman and Woziak's explanation. In a chapter titled "Bipolar in the Preschool Period" appearing in a definitive volume on the development and course of bipolar across the lifespan, the authors explain a central disagreement about the diagnosis of mania in children (Luby, Belden & Tandon, 2010). Some psychiatrists believe that children need to manifest discrete episodes of mania, as seen in adults, to meet the formal criteria for the diagnosis. Others believe that the temporal dimensions of the disorder should be adapted for children, allowing for rapid or continuous outbursts to qualify as episodes. Finally, others accept Biederman's and Wozniak's assertion that the classic symptoms of euphoria and grandiosity are replaced with severe irritability in children. These nuances are frequently neglected in studies and practice, creating great uncertainty about the prevalence and application of this diagnosis.\
\
Proponents of the diagnosis believe that the number of bipolar children has not grown in recent years, rather we have gotten better at diagnosing it (Kluger & Song, 2002). Critics point out that there is no evidence that children diagnosed with bipolar manifested the disorder when they grew up, and that many adults with bipolar diagnoses did not report having uncontrolled anger issues when they were young (Stringaris & Goodman, 2009). Nonetheless, the diagnosis of pediatric bipolar took off. Gabrielle Carson, a psychiatric researcher at Stony Brook University, characterizes the "bipolar controversy" as the question of "whether a broader definition of mania with less clear-cut episodes and more concurrent comorbidity [specifically, ADHD] represents a developmentally altered condition which will change in adulthood, or a condition which, because of its earlier onset, has a worse prognosis" (Carlson, 2011). She believes that labeling children bipolar became popular for non-scientific reasons. Carson thinks that many of the children diagnosed with bipolar used to be labeled with conduct disorders, a condition resulting from "bad parenting, lousy environment, poor supervision", and one that insurance companies will not reimburse (Spiegel, 2012). She thinks that when clinical psychiatrists were encouraged to think of these behaviors as "bipolar" they thought "'Heck, if that's what it is, we have a bunch of medicines that are supposed to be helpful for mania \'97 maybe I can make it better.'". Some parents also found the diagnosis somewhat liberating, since its biological nature was perceived to be context-independent and relieved them of blame for their children's conduct.\
\
There is evidence that other contributing factors may have influenced Biederman's tireless efforts to promote the pediatric bipolar diagnosis. As part of a congressional investigation into potential conflicts of interest between academic researchers and pharmaceutical companies, Senator Charles Grassley uncovered that Biederman failed to disclose to his employer over$1.6 millionin consulting fees from drugmakers earned between 2000 and 2007 (Harris and Carey,2008). Emails disclosed in a lawsuit, filed by parents who claimed Johnson & Johnson's Risperdal caused injury to their children, reveal Biederman in conversation with marketing executives at Johnson & Johnson. These emails imply that Biederman submitted ghost written papers for publication in scientific journals, and accepted payments to participate in Johnson & Johnson's Center for Education in the Study of Pediatric Bipolar (Harris,2008).One email from Biederman assured Johnson & Johnson that _planned_ studies  "will support the safety and effectiveness of [Risperadal] risperidone in this age group,"effectively guaranteeing the outcome of the study before it was ever conducted (Harris,2009).\
}