{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Where Science Meets Hope##\
\
In recent years one organization has tried to position itself at the center of this conversation, with a strong belief in the power of science and data to find an answer. The Child Mind Institute (CMI) was founded in 2009 by Dr. Harold Koplewicz, a psychiatrist and former NYU professor who is "committed to finding more effective treatments for childhood psychiatric and learning disorders, building the science of healthy brain development, and empowering children and their families with help, hope, and answers." (Child Mind Institute, n.d.). CMI has raised hundreds of millions of dollars in donations and funding, without accepting donations from pharmaceutical companies. Kaplowicz also runs a twin, for-profit clinical consultancy alongside the foundation, which primarily treats the children of the power elite, for rates listed at $1000 a session (Ellin, 2011). CMI's gala fundraisers have featured politicians and celebrities including Hilary Clinton, former New Jersey Governor Jon S. Corzine, Robert De Niro, Jimmy Buffet, Dr. Ruth Westheimer and George Stephenopoulos (Ellin, 2011; Child Mind Institute, n.d.).\
\
Koplewicz's mission in life "is to remove any stigma from mental illness among children and teenagers, make it merely something to be managed and overcome as it was with dyslexia or attention deficit disorder before it." (Ellin, 2011). He explains CMI's philosophy and mission:\
\
>We have patients, in our case children and adolescents, who desperately need help. These children may be out of control, overwhelmed by anxiety, dangerously aggressive, disorganized in their communication, floundering in school. We need to help them. Medications, often along with behavioral therapy, can have a transformative effect\'85 Furthermore, falling back on pure non-pharmacological treatment is not the better alternative, since these treatments have rarely undergone objective evaluation. (Koplewicz, 2011)\
\
The Child Mind Institute's messaging is consistently pro-medication, and their anti-stigma campaigns wrap this message in a veneer of upbeat packaging. In the same breath they argue against stigma, they simultaneously promote language and framing that endorses the biomedical model of children's suffering. CMI regularly runs print advertising campaigns to raise awareness and reduce stigma around childhood mental illness. In 2012 they rented a gigantic billboard outside of Penn Station, in one of the busiest intersections in New York City, depicting children frolicking in a park with a tagline proclaiming that CMI was where "science meets hope". A similar billboard campaign plastered New York's remaining phone booths depicting an adolescent girl on a stool, surrounded by a thought bubble of fantasies (e.g., "Travel to Fiji", "I want to be a designer", "Help my community"), with the tagline "Children's Mental Health Matters\'97help all children realize their potential". These messages are on the surface positive, or at worst, innocuous. It is easy to imagine why so many politicians, industry leaders, and celebrities have endorsed this feel-good cause.\
\
CMI's "symptom checker tool", available on their web site and intended to help parents learn more about children's mental health disorders, reveals their bias. The tool presents parents with a checklist of behaviors, of the form "My child is\'85" Descriptors include: disobedient, impulsive or hyperactive, having problems in school, has sleeping problems, has trouble paying attention, has excessive fears, worries, or very unusual thoughts, etc. (Child Mind Institute, n.d.). Depending on your selections, more detailed behavioral descriptions follow, along with a chance to share your family's psychiatric history. The branching paths all lead to additional information about a dozen different disorders, including major depressive disorder, somatic symptom disorder, conduct disorder, panic disorder, bipolar disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, and separation anxiety disorder. While the tool repeatedly encourages parents to seek the advice and diagnosis of a professional, none of the paths lead away from diagnosable disorders, and all paths through the survey lead parents to think about their children's behavior within the bio-medical model CMI promotes.\
\
To complicate the story further, Koplewicz was one of the co-authors on the infamous "Study 329" (Keller et al., 2001), a clinical trial conducted between 1994 and 1998 to study the effectiveness of Paxil (_paroxetine_) in children. The article was ghost-written by an industry sponsored public relations firm, and was crafted to downplay the study's findings (McGoey and Jackson, 2009). It deceptively inflated the efficacy of the drug, which was no more effective than a placebo, and covered up side effects appearing in adolescent subjects such as suicidal thinking. This study prompted New York Attorney General Elliot Spitzer to file suit against GlaxoSmithKline for fraud, since they had selectively withheld evidence of unsuccessful trials and negative side-effects (Harris, 2004). This study later became central evidence in the $3 billion federal settlement against GlaxoSmithKline (The US Department of Justice, 2012). One hopes that the "objective evaluations" Koplewicz wishes for non-pharmacological treatments conform to a higher standard than study 329.\
\
Biederman and Koplewicz are two of psychiatry's leading voices promoting a reevaluation of how society judges and treats childhood behavior. They shroud themselves in the objectivity of science, and seem uninterested in the range of causes that may underlie the irritability and behavioral misconduct they recommend treating pharmacologically. Systemic adjustments to children's nutrition, sleep, stress, poverty, oppression or education are not their primary concern. They are satisfied with biological and genetic explanations as the penultimate cause, and rarely explore environmental causal chains. The scandalous patterns of borderline-legal, conflicts-of-interest and cover-ups contribute to feelings of cynicism among activists. Psychiatrists' righteousness and self-confidence is especially troubling. From their writings, both Biederman and Koplewicz come across as true believers who genuinely want to help children and prevent suffering. Perhaps, if their teams were composed of interdisciplinary specialists alongside patients, peers and activists these star researchers might cede some of their objectivity-fueled confidence, and start paying more attention to the causes and implications of the treatments they promote. The treatments they trumpet create a great deal of misery and the outcomes of this cost-benefit analysis are far from clear.\
}