{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Diagnostic Wormholes##\
\
During this period of rampant increase in the treatment of pediatric bipolar, it needs to be noted that the diagnosis did not exist in the then current version of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual, DSM-IV-TR, the official guide to mental disorders published by the American Psychiatric Association. According to the DSM-IV-TR, bipolar was only recognized in patients older than 18. This period witnessed the manufacturing of a new disease, a common occurrences when releasing new versions of the DSM, but rare between editions.\
\
The antipsychotics administered to these children were prescribed "off-label" (Shekelle et al., 2007). As the record-breaking court settlements described earlier indicate, drug companies have been involved in numerous scandals around marketing drugs for off-label uses. A 2009 study found that between August 2006 and July 2007, 37 percent of prescriptions for anti-psychotic drugs were written by family doctors\'97general practitioners, not psychiatric specialists (Morgan).\
\
In summer 2008 the FDA legislated pediatric bipolar into existence so that clinical trials could proceed prior to the publication of the DSM-5 in 2013 (Dawdy, 2008). Philip Dawdy is an investigative journalist who worked as a staff writer for the Seattle Weekly until 2006, and won numerous awards for his mental health reporting, including an award from the National Mental Health Association in 2005-2006 (Dawdy, 2007). Between 2005 and 2010 he published _Furious Seasons_, a popular and influential mental health blog with a vibrant community and a readership in the thousands. In the summer of 2008, _Furious Seasons_ was a major news hub in the mental health network, and the site brought together activists, mental health professionals, and industry experts. Dawdy regularly published multiple stories a day, sometimes critiquing mainstream Pharma coverage, and often publishing original reporting. The FDA evaded inquiries demanding a definition of the disorder, and finally supplied thin, circular evidence for its existence (Dawdy, 2008). In 2008, the FDA's press secretary, Sandy Welsh wrote an email to Dawdy in an apparent response to an email campaign from his readers demanding an explanation:\
\
>The FDA does accept the validity of pediatric bipolar disorder. The FDA agrees with peer-reviewed journal articles, academics and clinicians that say that pediatric bipolar disorder can occur in children and adolescents and is a serious, chronic illness which causes shifts in a person's mood, energy, and ability to function.\
\
>The FDA, a science-based agency\'85 according to the National Institute of Mental Health: Research findings, clinical experience, and family accounts provide substantial evidence that bipolar disorder, also called manic-depressive illness, can occur in children and adolescents. Bipolar disorder is difficult to recognize and diagnose in youth, however, because it does not fit precisely the symptom criteria established for adults, and because its symptoms can resemble or co-occur with those of other common childhood-onset mental disorders. In addition, symptoms of bipolar disorder may be initially mistaken for normal emotions and behaviors of children and adolescents. But unlike normal mood changes, bipolar disorder significantly impairs functioning in school, with peers, and at home with family. (Dawdy, 2008)\
\
In her email, Welsh cites a narrow range of studies justifying the equivalent diagnosis of mania for children who manifest different symptoms than adults. They show that children and adults responded to the same bipolar medications, in this case, the anti-psychotics _Abilify_ and _Risperdal_. In one longitudinal study she cites titled "Clinical course of children and adolescents with bipolar spectrum disorders", the researchers bootstrap the illness by presuming it exists, and then, designed studies to track its predictors and course (Birmaher et al., 2006). Welsh also cites a meta-study endorsed by the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (McClellan, 2007) which itself states:\
\
>[It is not] clear whether the atypical forms of juvenile mania and the classic adult form of the disorder represent the same illness. The debate and controversy over juvenile bipolar disorder are not whether there are a significant number of youths who are explosive, dysregulated, and emotionally labile or whether these youths suffer significant impairment or are at risk for a variety of adverse outcomes, including substance abuse. These difficulties and concerns are commonplace, especially in community mental health settings and systems of care that deal with at-risk youths (e.g., juvenile justice, foster care). The debate is whether these problems in youths are best characterized as bipolar disorder and, more important, whether juvenile mania is the same illness as that classically described in adults. (McClellan, Kowatch & Findling, 2007)\
\
Critics of the FDA's decision claim they based their decision on a relatively small number of trials whose lead authors were part of a "cabal" advocating for the recognition of pediatric bipolar, including Biederman, Wozniak and Carlson. It is no surprise that influential psychiatric researchers were cited in the studies\'97their labs are extraordinarily successful, and their papers are cited widely. What is most disappointing is that the meta-study did not adequately represent psychiatrists opposed to approving the disorder. Instead of calling for further studies, or a provisional approval pending clinical trials to proceed, the FDA pulled the trigger and approved the condition without further debate. As a reminder of the stakes, their own list of recommendations includes the warning that "Most Youths With Bipolar I Disorder Will Require Ongoing Medication Therapy to Prevent Relapse; Some Individuals Will Need Lifelong Treatment" (McClellan, Kowatch & Findling, 2007).\
\
In 2007 the FDA approved Johnson & Johnson's _Risperdal_ for use in children as young as ten, and the approval for Bristol-Myers Squibb's _Abilify_ followed in 2008 (Office of the Commissioner, 2007). In 2009 an FDA advisory panel backed the expanded use of three commonly prescribed antipsychotic drugs for children---Lilly's _Zyprexa_, AstraZeneca's _Seroquel_ and Pfizer's _Geodon_ (Dawdy, 2009). As mentioned above, common side-effects for this class of drugs includes massive weight gain, metabolic disorders, _tardive dyskinesia_, and diabetes. Multiple class action suites are underway alleging damages for their use (\'dccok and Gaebel, 2008). The long-term effects on developing children are still unknown (Heavy, 2009).\
\
Even within the psychiatric community, there is little consensus about pediatric bipolar diagnoses and treatments. All the way back in 2000, psychiatrist Dr. Lawrence Diller wrote the following in a story published by Salon.com. The situation has worsened dramatically since then.\
\
>Diagnosing bipolar disorder in children as young as 3 has become the latest rage. It justifies using a host of medications to treat very difficult-to-manage, unhappy children. The old-line drug, lithium [previously approved for children older than 12], has been replaced by newer, untested (in children) mood stabilizers like Neurontin or Depakote as a first-choice intervention for pediatric "manic depression." Finally, a new class of anti-psychotic medications---the most popular these days is Risperdal---is heralded as the ultimately effective treatment for a number of diagnoses whose common features are not hallucinations or psychosis, but severe acting-out behaviors.\
\
>More than 200,000 children receive anti-psychotic medications, mostly to control unruly behavior rather than to treat hallucinations or other symptoms of schizophrenia.\
\
>No other society prescribes psychoactive medications to children the way we do. We use 80 percent of the world's stimulants such as Ritalin. Only Canada comes close to our rates, using half, per capita, the amounts we do. Europe and industrialized Asia use one-10th of what we do. Psychiatrists in those countries are perplexed and worried about trends in America. The use of psychoactive drugs other than Ritalin for preteen children is virtually unheard of outside this country. (Diller, 2000)\
\
A handful of academic researchers (Crystal et al., 2009), activists and independent journalists, such as Dawdy, have been closely following these developments. As we discussed above, mainstream media outlets lightly covered the controversy, often functioning more as cheerleaders from the sidelines. They have tracked and documented the dramatic increases in childhood diagnoses and prescriptions, and raised concerns over the long-term safety of these drugs due to their serious side-effects and known developmental and metabolic issues.They have pointed out the discrepancies between American and international diagnoses (Lane, 2009), as well as the more aggressive prescription patterns for children covered by Medicaid versus those covered by private insurance (Martin et al., 2002). Despite this,the rates of diagnoses and prescriptions continue to surge (Wilson,2009).\
\
Pediatric bipolar is a disorder that never existed in DSM-IV-TR, does not exist as a distinct diagnosis in DSM-5, and is presented as a part of the main bipolar disorder entry as if it had always existed. In the years leading up to the release of DSM-5, the FDA approved clinical trials for the distinct 'pediatric bipolar' diagnosis, but it has since been folded into the criteria for ordinary bipolar disorder. The DSM-5 description of bipolar now includes caveats that only apply to children, such as the indications for depressive episodes:\
\
>Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful). ( **Note:**  In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013)\
\
Or, the paragraphs explaining the differences in the ways mania presents in children:\
\
>In children, happiness, silliness and "goofiness" are normal in the context of special occasions; however, if these symptoms are recurrent, inappropriate to the context, and beyond what is expected for the developmental level of the child, they may meet [the criterion for a manic episode]\'85  In children, overestimation of abilities and belief that, for example, they are the best at a sport or the smartest in the class is normal; however, when such beliefs are present despite clear evidence to the contrary or the child attempts feats that are clearly dangerous and, most important, represent a change from the child's normal behavior, the grandiosity criterion should be considered satisfied. (American Psychiatric Association, 2013)\
\
In another last minute play, the editorial board of the DSM-5 incorporated in their 2010 draft an entirely new childhood disorder: _Temper Dysregulation Disorder (with Dysphoria)_ (TDD). It was proposed in response to the criticism of the over-diagnosis of bipolar in irritable children, meant to provide an escape valve for doctors who did not want to saddle a child with the stigma of a bipolar diagnosis. A number of psychiatrists published their concerns with the last minute addition to the manual:\
\
>We believe that currently there is insufficient scientific support to include TDD as a unique diagnostic entity. Furthermore, we believe that the inclusion of TDD will have an adverse impact on patient care, research, and the general public's perception of child psychiatry. (Axelson et al., 2011)\
\
Their main criticisms were that the disorder "is a symptom, not a syndrome". The diagnosis overlaps extensively with existing disorders, and the criteria do not provide any way to distinguish between TDD and the co-occurrence of severe explosive outbreaks in mood, anxiety, conduct and autism spectrum disorders. They feared that the media implied the diagnosis would lead to more psychosocial treatments, but they acknowledge the cynical likelihood that "the rationale that TDD will reduce the inappropriate use of medication in children and adolescents with temper outbursts also seems at odds with perceptions of how the pharmaceutical industry approaches the _DSM_." Given pharma's modus operandi, TDD might begin as a way for children to avoid a bipolar diagnosis and the accompanying anti-psychotic treatments, but would soon have similar treatment recommendations. Finally, they demonstrate an awareness and concern over the reputation of child psychiatry in the media:\
\
>The media is rife with charges that psychiatry pathologizes normal behavior and turns misbehavior and character flaws into medical disorders, thereby absolving individuals from responsibility for their actions. Skeptical and humorous reports have already surfaced in the media about how temper outbursts in children are now going to be classified as a disease and that the _DSM-5_ will have a "temper-tantrum" disorder.\
\
The 2013 publication of the DSM-5 includes both Temper Dysregulation Disorder, as well as the updated bipolar criteria describing overlapping symptoms in children. I will return to the controversies around the publication of the DSM-5 in Chapter 4 where I detail my visit to the 2012 American Psychiatric Association conference. To many of the protesters it seemed like psychiatry was unilaterally defining the parameters of normal childhood behavior, was manufacturing new disorders out of thin air, and was making it up as they were going along.}