{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Pathological Soothsayers#\
\
If these trends are not sufficiently jarring, the future is even more disconcerting. Psychiatry continues to innovate, and is poised to push beyond pathologizing formerly normal behaviors by pathologizing _risk_ with the growing rise of _prodromal_ diagnoses, also known as _Psychotic Risk Syndrome_. The etymology of this word traces back to a Greek term _pr\'f3dromos_, meaning "running before" or precursor (Prodromal, n.d.). An emerging trend in clinical psychiatry is the appropriation of this concept under the paradigm of "early intervention in psychosis" for "at-risk" patients.\
\
Psychiatrists are starting to preventively diagnose mental illness and are treating people before they exhibit any behavioral symptoms. Children and adolescents are especially vulnerable to prodromal diagnoses, and much of the research and marketing is directed at preventing children from developing mental illnesses later in life. We saw this tendency at work in the competing definitions for pediatric bipolar, and the emphasis on preventing "first breaks" due to the "kindling effect" hypothesis. The Papoloses explain this idea in _The Bipolar Child_:\
\
>Initial periods of cycling may begin with an environmental stressor, but if the cycles continue or occur unchecked, the brain becomes kindled or sensitized - pathways inside the central nervous system are reinforced so to speak - and future episodes of depression, hypomania, or mania will occur by themselves (independently of an outside stimulus), with greater and greater frequency. (Papolos & Papolos, 2000)\
\
This logic, taken to its natural conclusion, led researchers to search for ways to identify and prevent first psychotic breaks before they occurred. The Editor-in-Chief of the peer-reviewed journal _Current Psychiatry_ identifies early diagnosis and intervention as one of the top six trends affecting all of psychiatry, not just child psychiatry:\
\
>_Earlier diagnosis and early intervention_\
\
>The past decade has witnessed a surge of progress in identifying individuals at high risk for psychosis or mood disorders. The "prodrome" has become a fertile area of research, with a focus on early "treatment" even before the clinical syndrome of schizophrenia or mania appears. The goal is to try to delay, modify, or ameliorate incipient serious mental illness by using both pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. (Nasrallah, 2009)\
\
Intuitively, preventative health care seems like a good thing. In the words of Benjamin Franklin, "an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure", and a modern variation of the Hipppocratic Oath includes the line "I will prevent disease whenever I can, for prevention is preferable to cure". Western medicine is often criticized for primarily responding to acute crises, instead of proactively promoting health and well-being. However, the reductionist flattening of minds into brains leads to categorical errors which pervert the Hippocratic principle to "do no harm." Applying the medical paradigm to the treatment of risks, instead of disorders, stretches the dangerously elastic diagnostic net beyond breaking point. Especially when many of the preventative treatments carry substantial risks of their own, the calculus of prevention is dangerously skewed. Many psychiatric patients feel their treatments are worse than their diseases; how much more so when the _possible risk_ of a disease is being targeted?\
\
Analogies between mental conditions and diseases of the body, such as diabetes, measles, or heart failure, are often the point of departure for proponents of prodromal treatment. However, these casual comparisons mask assumptions and disguise relevant differences. The pathologization of diverse mental states remains controversial, unlike life-threatening viruses or organ failures. Furthermore, there is currently no causal theory explaining why some people's psychological experiences degenerate into crisis, or consensus on what constitutes an appropriate response to traumatic circumstances. Without a causal theory explaining transitions between mental states, all prodromal diagnoses of mental conditions are necessarily speculative explanations for correlations. It is unclear if such models are universally generalizable. Preventative treatment based on aggregates is highly questionable, especially considering the serious risks these treatments pose.\
\
The roots of prodromal diagnosis of mental conditions can be traced back to work on the prodromal identification of schizophrenia:\
\
>What is needed is not the early diagnosis of schizophrenia, but the diagnosis of pre-psychotic schizophrenia. We must learn to recognize that state of mind which will develop into schizophrenia unless appropriate measures are taken to prevent deterioration. (Meares, 1959:55)\
\
However, the identification of reliable predictors of schizophrenia has proven to be notoriously difficult and conceptually slippery:\
\
>Identifying symptoms or signs that reliably predict onset would obviously aid attempts to prevent mental disorders. Such specific predictors do not currently exist. In fact, one could argue that if any such risk factors were identified they would be conceptualized as early phenomena of the disorder itself... The nonspecific nature of these common features is notable. (Yung et al., 1996: 285)\
\
Yung et al. describe the difficulties identifying prodromal symptoms for psychosis. The onset of psychosis is often "gradual" and "low-grade". Also, unlike contracting the measles, an all or nothing proposition, psychosis exists on a continuum, involving degrees of clinical judgment. To detect the onset of psychosis, clinicians can be attentive to "attenuated" or "subthreshold" symptoms, but these precursor signs and symptoms quickly become symptoms for the disorder itself. Contenders for early indications of subsequent development of psychosis include: a) selective attention and perceptual abnormalities; b) a change in the sense of self and the world; and, c) suspiciousness.\
\
The clinical gaze embodied in the pages of the DSM has always been rooted in the psychological theory of Behaviorism (Skinner, 1974)---the symptoms it defines are all observable behaviors, and are oblivious to the subject's interior mental life. The trend towards prodromal mental diagnoses is flawed precisely because of the kind of power it cedes to an already arrogant apparatus, which, as we will demonstrate in upcoming chapters, fails to listen to the voices of the people it purports to treat. The risks of preemptive discipline and prescriptive moral judgment present a slippery slope which psychiatry has already begun to descend, and the dangers are simply too serious and damaging for this practice to continue. Patients, especially children, are being indicted on the basis of hereditary factors, thought crimes, and harmless deviant behavior. In a distinctly Orwellian twist, patients exhibiting symptoms are psychotic, while those that don't exhibit symptoms, _yet_, are prodromal (Orwell, 1961).\
\
Furthermore, the psychopharmacological treatments prescribed for these prodromal diagnoses are physically dangerous and psychologically damaging. As already discussed, the atypical antipsychotics that are often prescribed in these circumstances have been linked to excessive weight gain, metabolic disorders, and diabetes (Yan, 2008). The stigma attached to these diagnoses is also emotionally threatening. Advertising campaigns, such as the award-winning "Prescribe Early" poster, depicted an abandoned wallet, teddy bear and keys on a barren street. It targeted parent's worst fears by invoking the terror of a missing child. It suggested this worst-case situation could be avoided with preventative pharmaceutical interventions, prescribed before it was "too late" (Rosenberg, 2009).\
\
Children and teens often traverse intractable emotional terrain on their journey of self-discovery and becoming. Adult disapproval towards behaviors (smoking, drinking, inappropriate speech or activity, irritability) and appearances (fashion, body piercing, hairstyle) has increasingly taken the form of chemical discipline, with psychiatry's permission and blessing (White, Anjum and Schulz, 2006). Defiant teenagers are threatened with prodromal diagnoses based on their alternative fashion choices and misunderstood behavior. Smoking and substance abuse have already been associated with bipolar in teens, and are already being used as diagnostic criteria for the "illness" (Wilens et al., 2008). An article in the _American Journal of Psychiatry_ introduces the following patient and explores if this teenage girl is prodromal for schizophrenia:\
\
>A 13-year-old girl, currently in the eighth grade and with a history of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, was brought by her mother to a university-affiliated outpatient psychiatric clinic after a gradual decline in her academic performance was noted\'85 She had tasted alcohol in the past but denied current use. She had also used marijuana a half-dozen times\'85 her parents claimed that she had been withdrawn and had appeared sad and that at times they needed to prompt her to take a shower. She had a maternal aunt with bipolar affective disorder and a great uncle who had been institutionalized for unknown reasons\'85 she was dressed in Goth attire, including a black T-shirt with images of letters dripping blood; she had dyed black hair. Her affect was blunted but was slightly more animated when her parents left the room. She denied thoughts of suicide. She reported occasionally hearing whispering voices calling her name and saying that she is worthless. She also reported the belief that her friends did not like her as much as they had\'85 (White et al., 2006: 376)\
\
I do not know anything more about this case than the short blurb presented at the beginning of this journal article. Clearly, this eighth grader seems to be experiencing a great deal of emotional pain, and has found cultural styles to express her anger. The whispering voices that she reports hearing may or may not be a cause of alarm, as many more people report hearing voices without negative consequences than is widely believed (British Psychological Society, 2014). Similarly, her disappointing academic performance may also be attributed to numerous factors, but White et. al. only consider one: "the presence of cognitive decline raises the possibility of a degenerative neurological disorder." Of course, the entire framework for explaining this girl's state of mind is clinical, but it is still striking to read this language and consider all the competing explanations that are left unexplored:\
\
>The clinical vignette reflects these challenges. The early adolescent patient presents with a number of symptoms consistent with a schizophrenia prodrome, including a long-standing history of difficulties with attention, a recent history of cognitive decline, social withdrawal, and what appears to be psychotic symptoms. Yet these symptoms could also be explained in terms of major depression with psychotic features, bipolar affective disorder, substance use disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or even an aberration in the maturation and solidification of personality structure. Furthermore, these diagnoses are complicated by their emergence within the developmental framework of the child, and thus developmental norms must also be taken into account.\
\
There are many environmental factors that could explain the emergence of these "symptoms", and ways to understand them as reasonable reactions, not a pathological disorder. Caring parents are often desperate to help their struggling children, and will try anything that might "fix" the problems they perceive. In my opinion, this girl needs more compassionate support, not a stigmatizing diagnosis. Just as there is slippage between onset symptoms and true symptoms, the lines between diagnosis of 'schizophrenic prodrome' and 'schizophrenic' is also blurred. The treatments are similar, the stigma is similar, and the impact on someone's identity is likely similar as well. In this scenario, it is unclear if psychosocial support options have been exhausted, or the circumstances leading up to her visit to the psychiatrist. Situations like this scream out of the kinds of community oriented, peer-support structures that are advocated by activists and alternative mental health initiatives.\
\
The trend towards prodromal diagnoses coincides with a parallel trend in society towards the auto-classification and prediction of citizen and consumer behavior (Andrejevic, 2007). Governments and corporations have a strong interest in predictive behavioral models of every person they monitor (Stanley and Steinhardt, 2003). These systems are currently making their way off the lab bench, and into production systems (Robert, 2005). Already, algorithms to automatically classify human behavior based only on video streams have been deployed in nursing homes, casinos, the Olympics, and urban environments (IBM Smart Surveillance Solution, n.d.; Informedia Digital Video Understanding, n.d.). As computers scientists and engineers contend with the challenge of automatically classifying the full range of human behaviors, the DSM's ready-made ontology may prove too convenient to challenge. Just as code enacts law, diagnostic labels are on their way to being represented in software, where their embodiment will take on a life of its own\'97algorithmic diagnoses. When that occurs we will have seen the successful establishment of a new diagnostic environment; indeed, a system that opaquely collects, categorizes, interprets, and proffers definitions of illness similarly to the way Google defines news, or Facebook defines your status feed---that is to say, with what amounts to an arbitrary sort of logic and rigor.\
\
Such a future for psychiatry would be quite disturbing. Prodromal treatment is the latest progression in an ever-constricting system of social control which purports to contain states of mind within definitional cages. Preventative psychiatric treatment hints at forms of control that raise legitimate questions about omniscient surveillance, and we can begin to glimpse how grotesque these practices might become in an era of pervasive surveillance and electronic medical records. As I describe in more detail in chapter 6, a study currently underway in Australia is attempting to predict the onset of manic episodes based on changes in Facebook use (The FAD Study, 2014). Pathologizing the traumatically scarred and neurologically diverse is bad enough. Extending this attitude, and treatment, to those _at risk_ of neurological diversity is ethically dubious and threatens our fundamental freedoms.\
}