{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Ferocious Attacks and Formulaic Defenses#\
\
In the summer of 2011, Harold Koplewicz wrote column in the Huffington Post responding to Marcia Angell's favorable reviews of three books in _The New York Review of Books_ (Angell, 2011). Angell, whose work we examined earlier in this chapter, is an American physician, Harvard lecturer, and the first female Editor-in-Chief of the _New England Journal of Medicine_.  In 2004 she published a book titled _The Truth about the Drug Companies: How They Deceive Us and What to Do about It_, and she continues to command great respect and authority within the medical and scientific communities. Koplewicz, who we also encountered earlier this chapter, is a psychiatrist and former NYU professor, and is currently the director of the Child Mind Institute. Angell reviewed _The Emperor's New Drugs: Exploding the Antidepressant Myth_ (Kirsch, 2010) written by a UK psychologist, _Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric Drugs, and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in America_ (Whitaker, 2010) written by an American journalist, and _Unhinged: The Trouble With Psychiatry\'97A Doctor's Revelations About a Profession in Crisis_ (Carlat, 2010) written by a Boston psychiatrist.\
\
In her review, Angell depicts the growth of mental illness as an epidemic, citing similar statistics to the ones I presented at the beginning of this chapter. She points out that "nowadays, treatment by medical doctors nearly always means psychoactive drugs, that is, drugs that affect the mental state", and that "the shift from 'talk therapy' to drugs as the dominant mode of treatment coincides with the emergence over the past four decades of the theory that mental illness is caused primarily by chemical imbalances in the brain that can be corrected by specific drugs." She asks, along with the authors she reviews:\
\
>What is going on here? Is the prevalence of mental illness really that high and still climbing? Particularly if these disorders are biologically determined and not a result of environmental influences, is it plausible to suppose that such an increase is real? Or are we learning to recognize and diagnose mental disorders that were always there? On the other hand, are we simply expanding the criteria for mental illness so that nearly everyone has one? And what about the drugs that are now the mainstay of treatment? Do they work? If they do, shouldn't we expect the prevalence of mental illness to be declining, not rising?\
\
Angell characterizes the books' arguments as documenting a "frenzy of diagnosis", the overuse of drugs with sometimes devastating side effects, and widespread conflicts of interest. She wants us to stop thinking about "psychoactive drugs as the best, and often the only treatment for mental illness or emotional distress", claims that our reliance on them "tends to close off other options", and calls for more research studying alternative treatments and their inclusion in medical textbooks. Regarding problems with troubled children, often in "troubled families in troubled circumstances", she recommends that "[t]reatment directed at these environmental conditions\'97such as one-on-one tutoring to help parents cope or after-school centers for the children\'97should be studied and compared with drug treatment."\
\
In the second part of her review Angell added the DSM to the list of books she reviewed. Discussing the upcoming release of DSM-5, she recognized the book's "extraordinary influence within American society." She also reviewed the multiplication of diagnoses with each edition and extensive industry sponsorship.\
\
Koplewicz calls Angell's review a "ferocious two-part attack\'85 on antidepressants, antipsychotics and, in general, medications to treat psychiatric disorders\'85 she impugns both the medications and the motives of the psychiatric profession". He accuses Angell of being a conspiracy theorist who sees "a conspiracy of psychiatrists and drug companies for their mutual benefit, with patient benefit only a distant concern". Strangely, Koplewicz only responds directly to Angell's critique, not to the authors she is reviewing, and demeaningly characterizes Angell's take as "her story" and "her telling".\
\
Koplewicz presents a typical and formulaic defense for psychopharmacology. As the influential director of a multi-million dollar a year non-profit, his views are a model for psychiatrists across the field. He claims, "the drive for medication was fueled by the surprising observation that they were better treatments for mental illness than talk therapy or earlier sedative drugs." This assertion is precisely the point that Kirsch, Whitaker and Carlat had questioned. Are these treatments really better? Koplewicz reiterates the myth of their efficacy without engaging, or even taking seriously, the possibility that they are not.\
\
Regarding the DSM, Koplewicz rehashes the staid line that the DSM's real value is in "promoting reliable clinical communication\'85. nothing in the DSM\'85 'pushes' medication --- or any other form of treatment". His denial of the real power of the DSM and diagnoses, beyond its use as professional shorthand, antagonizes those who attempt to engage psychiatry in good faith. Even the psychiatrists who opposed the addition of TDD to the DSM-5 acknowledged "how the pharmaceutical industry approaches the DSM." (Axelson et al., 2011).\
\
Koplewicz makes a pragmatic argument that while more studies are needed, people are in need of help. While this position is laudable, his commitment to "objective evaluation" is confusing. On the one hand, he cedes that "objective research" has not caught up with "clinical realities", but he still has faith in pharmacology, even in the absence of evidence demonstrating its effectiveness. On the other hand, "falling back on pure non-pharmacological treatment is not the better alternative, since these treatments have rarely undergone objective evaluation." Koplewicz writes off non-pharmacological treatments on the grounds that they have not been subjected to "objective evaluation", holding them to a stricter standard than he does to pharmacological treatments. Furthermore, he does not engage with the scientific evaluations that call into question the value of these pharmacological treatments, the basis for all three books that Angell reviews. Finally, regarding future risks Koplewicz writes: "As to the issue of psychoactive drugs actually harming patients by altering their brain chemistry over the long term, which Angell posits, here too data is lacking. It makes no sense to forego present benefit because of undemonstrated future harms." The potential harm of psychoactive drugs is very well demonstrated, so Koplewicz's defense rings hollow:\
\
>We try to weigh the risks of psychoactive drug treatment against the risks of forgoing treatment. That risk often includes academic failure, dropping out of school, substance abuse and even suicide. Unfortunately, the risks of avoiding demonstrated useful treatments are not something critics, like Angell, consider.\
\
Angell does not avoid considering the risks to troubled youth. Koplewicz avoids acknowledging the full-blown impact of a diagnosis on a child, the demonstrated health risks that psychoactive drugs pose, and categorically dismisses treatment approaches that cannot be objectively evaluated.\
\
}