{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Transcending Monocultures#\
\
The volleys portrayed in this chapter, and others like it, continually antagonize mad activists and seed mistrust and disillusionment with the establishment. The evidence that children's behavior differs dramatically from prior generations is inconclusive. It is entirely plausible that our adult standards and judgments have changed, not their behavior. However, if we really are witnessing a rise in childhood irritability and behavioral misconduct, there are many important research questions we need to be asking, and different people who need to be answering them. If the dramatic increase in children's explosive outbursts are not illusory, we need to be looking for explanations beyond an individual's biology or brain chemistry. These outbursts may in fact be symptoms of society's ills, and it is essential to connect the dots between this epidemic in childhood mental illness and other pressing social issues like poverty, racism, educational reform and media consumption. These are questions that demand more study from social scientists, and psychiatry needs to collaborate directly with sociologists, anthropologists, and public health professionals. The field's isolation from the rest of the academy leaves them deprived of essential perspectives on their work and its impact.\
\
The proponents of pediatric bipolar often rely on rhetorical sleights of hand to bolster their case by strategically framing the terms of the debate. They conflate instrumentally derived facts with value judgments, and wield these facts in an attempt to short-circuit debate. They cite laboratory evidence such as neurotransmitter activity, brain imaging, genetic markers, and heredity as proof that patients are "sick" when, at best, this evidence signifies difference and diversity. This diagnostic strategy is decidedly one-sided, as spokespeople for the prevailing medical model claim an objective view from nowhere, but their vantage point is loaded with subjective value judgments. Many are so thoroughly immersed in the disease paradigm and a scientific worldview that they don't even recognize the implicit subjectivity in these pronouncements. These flagrant distortions are most visible at the diagnostic boundaries, such as when moody toddlers and defiant adolescents are diagnosed as diseased.\
\
All too often, purportedly neutral facts are loaded with value judgments, but presented as incontrovertible on the basis of their "factuality." This perspective does not deny the possibility of varying degrees of confidence in different assertions, but we must demand recognition of the inevitable entanglement of subjectivity in our descriptions of a complex and contingent world (Alcoff, 1991). The real-world implications of the misuse of language and rhetoric are serious and potent (Davis, 1997).\
\
To avoid the deadlock of epistemological paralysis, psychiatry must break free from its monoculture and listen closely to language and voices of the people they are trying to help. Humility and a genuine respect for people's agency require that we take their stories and experiences seriously. These multiplicities of personal narratives demand reconceptualizations of mental health that defy the psychiatry's mainstream messaging. As the mantra of the disability rights movement powerfully insists: "Nothing about us without us." In recognition of the validity of this claim, we turn now to some of these stories, many of which include clear articulations of the earnest desire to be listened to and heard. Through these narratives, we hear these activists demanding legitimate recognition, which goes beyond the condescension of paternalistic attention.\
}