{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Participatory Paradoxes#\
\
Over the past decade the politics and rhetoric of activists organizing around mental health issues have begun to shift dramatically. These shifts have been simultaneously subtle and stark. Crucially, some elements of the movement have moved away from a purely oppositional, head-butting critique of the psychiatric-pharmaceutical alliance, and their demands have begun to focus on questions of voice. Channeling the spirit of the disability rights movement, this new generation of the mad resistance has taken up the cry "Nothing about us without us". \
\
James Charlton cataloged the centrality of this phrase to disability rights in his book _Nothing About Us Without Us: Disability Oppression and Empowerment_ (1998). Charlton first heard the expression invoked by leaders of the South African disabled people's group in 1993, who claimed to have heard it used earlier at an Eastern European international disability rights conference (p. 2). Two years later he saw a front page headline in the Mexico City daily about thousands of landless peasants marching under the banner "_Nunca Mas Sin Nosotros_" (Never Again Without Us), and adopted "Nothing about us without us" as the working title of his book.\
\
Chalrton quotes Ed Roberts, a leader of the international disability rights movement "If we have learned one thing from the civil rights movement in the U.S., it's that when others speak for you, you lose" (Driedger 1989:28), and traces the impulse behind the expression "Nothing about us without us" to the civil rights era, embodied in works such as _Our Bodies, Ourselves: A book by and for women_ (Boston Women's Health Book Collective, 1973), and the widely used civil rights slogan "Power to the People".\
\
On the surface the proposition "Nothing about us without us" seems like a timid assertion, easy to satisfy. However, it has proven to be one of the most radical demands the movement can make. It has radical implications for the ways in which human conditions are investigated and addressed. It also challenges the binary distinction between objectivity and subjectivity, and calls into question the possibility of objective knowledge devoid of context.\
\
The short phrase "Nothing about us without us" contains two occurrences of the word "us", each with distinct meanings. The first occurrence of "us" refers to a group identity that is created and imposed by socio-political forces external to the group. The second occurrence of "us" refers to a group identity that has been reclaimed by the group itself, demanding their own participation in the co-construction of their own world.  The second "us" challenges the very categories that underlie the first "us", a complex feedback loop which negates an externally imposed identification and replaces it with the solidarity of self-identification. This feedback loop is common across groups engaged in identity politics, as an aspect of their identity is initially defined by others only to be reclaimed and redefined by their own advocacy.  \
\
Mad folk have traditionally occupied a paradoxical place in public discourse. By definition they are branded "irrational" and are categorically precluded from having a voice in rational public debate. In an age when people of all sorts insist that their understandings of themselves and their problems matter, how can this constituency find their voices, sustain them, and make them persuasive? Who will accept their legitimacy and listen? This problematic has shaped mental health activism throughout its history, amplifying the dynamics around "credibility struggles" that Stephen Epstein details in his analysis of the AIDS activism (1996). Layered on top the distrust of established experts, mad activists struggle to assert their own credibility. This struggle mirrors the struggles of other marginalized groups, such as women, children, blacks and LGBT, who have needed to assert their own humanity, arguing for their right to speak and be heard prior to advocating for their specific issues.  This emerging wave of mad resistance has begun to confront this impasse directly.\
}