{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Transcending dualities#\
\
Critics have engaged the controversies surrounding psychiatric diagnoses on multiple conceptual fronts, provoking debates about the integrity of the rhetoric, science and politics. The work of Stuart Kirk and Herb Kutchins, professors of social work, questions the science, statistics and proofs claimed by the small committee of psychiatric researchers who authored DSM-III and DSM-IIIR. _The Selling of DSM: The Rhetoric of Science in Psychiatry_ (1992), published by an academic press, and _Making Us Crazy: DSM: The Psychiatric Bible and the Creation of Mental Disorders_ (2003), a trade book, expose the workings of these backroom proceedings, and describe their success in transforming psychiatry's central problem from one of "validity" to one of "reliability", the measure of multiple doctors agreeing on the same diagnosis. Reliability is a narrower, technical problem for researchers to solve, one that effectively redefines a diagnosis as valid if multiple doctors agree on the diagnosis. As Bradley Lewis shows in _Moving beyond Prozac_ (2006), the discourses around psychiatric controversies encompass multiple perspectives beyond the rhetorical and scientific. The _rhetorical critiques_ are theory-laden challenges to the ideological frames that are constructed and mobilized to describe the issues. The _scientific critiques_ accept (or bracket) the dominant research paradigms and concentrate on questioning the validity of the research claims, on their own terms. Finally, the _political critiques_ question governance and processes such as the construction of the research agenda, the voices involved in formulating policy recommendations, and the corruption, conflicts of interest and aggressive marketing practices that influence behavior and perception. These dimensions often overlap, and are difficult to disentangle completely in debate or analysis.\
\
The political plane is where questions of diversity and inclusion are activated in the context of crafting a purposeful process for building consensus, resolving conflicts and constructing knowledge. The consideration of politics, in this sense, is largely absent from Kirk and Kutchins' work and is the operating beachhead for the emerging wave of mad resistance I describe in this dissertation.\
\
The new wave of activists I profile often engage these controversies on all of these planes simultaneously, as the assertion "nothing about us without us" embraces a range of rhetorical, scientific and political moves. Their focus on enriching the language we use to describe mental wellbeing and distress represents a deliberate effort to participate in the co-construction of their own reality. Their arguments are often motivated and amplified by dubious science, greedy corporations, and corrupt doctors and policymakers. The emerging wave of mad resistance is fundamentally about applying this political maxim to the full range of psychiatric discourse, and making explicit their demands for a participatory voice.\
\
It is useful to contrast this emerging position with other strands of psychiatric resistance, which often leads to opponents butting heads with little chance for reconciliation. For example, the mind-body problem, a philosophical quandary about the nature of and relationship between the mental and the physical, is one site of rhetorical contention that stands between some psychiatrists and psychiatric survivors. Arguments on both sides of this debate effectively assume dualism, although these are rarely the explicit terms of debate. Dualism is the metaphysical position that postulates that physical and mental phenomena are distinct, though they somehow influence each other. Reductionist psychiatrists cast their arguments in terms implying that the flow of neurotransmitters and the firing of neurons uniquely determine states of mind, but not vice versa. Similarly, the arguments of orthodox anti-psychiatrists suggest that they deny the impact of biochemistry or neurophysiology on their minds, and they vehemently resist any biological explanation of their behavior (with the notable exception of psychiatric drugs, which they blame for detrimental affects on their minds and bodies). These largely unexamined, and, at times, incoherent positions creep into the discourse, even when the participants deny their dualistic dispositions.\
\
A commitment to monism, a theoretical alternative to dualism, presents a substantive challenge to both the orthodox biomedical model of mental illness and orthodox anti-psychiatrists. Monism entails that all behaviors are correlated with corresponding states of mind, and similarly, changes in our brains are also correlated with changes in mind, so that mind and brain are dual aspects of the same phenomena. Unfortunately, the mind-body problem has remained unsolved for millennia, and adopting these positions results in untenable standoffs. Transcending dualism only addresses part of the conflict. To fully embrace a more democratic epistemology, we must also transcend the theoretical questions themselves and pragmatically consider their political implications, bracketing the theoretical frames, for now.\
\
The act of categorizing a state of mind/brain and its corresponding behaviors as pathological is never devoid of subjective inflection and will always involve value judgments and interpretations of behavior that can never isolated in a pure form. While an fMRI image may be used to demonstrate _correlations_ between states of brain and states of mind (crucially, not the necessary consequences of these brain functions), an fMRI will never be able to conclusively demonstrate that a person suffers from a psychiatric disorder. The act of categorizing certain behaviors as deviant or pathological will always involve subjective value judgments. Analytical distinctions carve up the world in particular ways, grouping data together and fitting them to preconceived patterns. Whenever something is counted, something else is omitted, and behavioral descriptions are forever imprisoned in language, comprised of words that are intrinsically bound to shades of semantic senses, embedded in networks of meaning which are inherently social.\
\
Psychiatric facts are inextricably woven among socio-cultural values. A patient, whether treated as a mind, brain, or unified whole, can never be diagnosed independently of our collective judgment of the subject's behavior and disposition. Both minds and brains exist in social entanglements, and divorcing the diagnosis of a patient from his or her psycho-social context effectively locates an individual's pathology inside their skull, without acknowledging the influence and impact of their environment. In theory, a full service treatment team might consider the patient's psycho-social context, but this contextualization is not typical in practice, as market forces, insurance codes and psychiatric cultural norms incentivize diagnoses that are devoid of context. Laboratory diagnostics will never be able to tell us what behaviors to pathologize or determine the threshold for 'normal', since we as a society co-construct these values. Is the patient suffering from a uterine parasite, or blessed with child? Is the patient suffering a psychotic break or struggling to navigate his or her dangerous gifts?\
\
The human condition is richly varied and there are limitless ways for us to find meaning in our experiences. To insist that there is only a single way to make sense of someone's life story requires generous helpings of arrogance and stubbornness (Fadiman, 1997). Once we recognize the inextricable coupling of psychiatric facts with socio-cultural values, the imperative to include more voices in the production of psychiatric knowledge ought to be self-evident. Under the status quo, a small group of primarily white, middle-aged men, most of whom have medical degrees from Western societies, are responsible for defining a normal range of human consciousness, what constitutes healthy experiences, and how to support and treat people who are suffering (Kurt and Kutchins, 1992). They define the parameters of normal and illness through the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), a book whose influence extends far beyond psychiatry, throughout medicine, therapeutic services, insurance claims and health policy. Historically, the team that has drafted this defining document has omitted psychologists, psychoanalysts, social workers, philosophers, humanists, social scientists, patients, families of patients, as well as mental health activists of various stripes (Lewis, 2006). While DSM-IV and 5 committees have made some gestures towards including more mental health professionals outside of psychiatry, as well as minorities and international representation, these additions have been ad-hoc, and not part of a deliberate philosophy of inclusion. It is easy to recognize the fundamental flaws in this arrangement and how diverse perspectives are essential for a more comprehensive and reliable understanding.\
\
The moral imperative for diversity of input is not the only argument for inclusion. Recent sociological findings have demonstrated that diversity enhances organizational creativity and innovation, while homogeneity stifles it (Burt, 2004). Identifying and questioning assumptions, crafting compromises, and designing innovative alternatives are some of the reasons why diversity and inclusion are so important. The mere inclusion of diverse actors does not insure a fair outcome, and processes and procedures must be deliberately adopted which maximize the possibility of fair outcomes. Sometimes positions are irreconcilable, and compromise a Faustian bargain, but the difficulty of achieving absolute fairness should not stop us from trying to improve the current situation.}