{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Creatively maladjusted#\
\
In the 1960s, the civil rights and anti-war movements challenged authority on multiple fronts, and Martin Luther King, Jr. famously called for his followers to stand maladjusted in order to reveal the madness of an unjust, self-destructive, and irrational society:\
\
>Modern psychology has a word that has become common---it is the word maladjusted. We read a great deal about it. It is a ringing cry of modern child psychology; and certainly we all want to live the well adjusted and avoid neurotic and schizophrenic personalities. But I must say to you this evening, my friends, there are some things in our nation and in our world to which I'm proud to be maladjusted. And I call upon you to be maladjusted and all people of good will to be maladjusted to these things until the good society is realized. I never intend to adjust myself to segregation and discrimination. I never intend to become adjusted to religious bigotry. I never intend to adjust myself to economic conditions that will take necessities from the many to give luxuries to the few, and leave millions of people perishing on a lonely island of poverty in the midst of a vast ocean of prosperity. I must honestly say, however much criticism it brings, that I never intend to adjust myself to the madness of militarism, and to the self-defeating effects of physical violence... Yes, I must confess that I believe firmly that our world is in dire need of a new organization \'96 the International Association for the Advancement of Creative Maladjustment... Through such maladjustment we will be able to emerge from the bleak and desolate midnight of man's inhumanity to man, into the bright and glittering daybreak of freedom and justice. (King, 1962)\
\
Widely read critical psychiatrists such as R. D. Laing (1967) and Thomas Szasz (1974) identified the language of "madness" as an instrument of oppression, and influential academics such as Erving Goffman (1961) and Michel Foucault (1965) wrote extensively about the institutions of psychiatry, their coercive power and histories of abuse. The counter-cultural movements of the 1960s embraced these societal diagnoses and psychiatric critiques that strongly reverberated with their messages of individuation, self-expression, and defiance of established forms of thought.\
\
Over the ensuing decades, a diverse assemblage of organizations continued to actively resist psychiatry. Their positions varied, with an insistence on self-determination, individual freedoms, and a critique of coercion as their common denominator (Morrison, 2006). Some activists claimed that mental illness was a social construct and challenged psychiatry's ontological assumptions, while others accepted psychiatry's diagnoses, but advocated for health insurance parity and consumer rights. Some refuted the therapeutic value of any and all medications, and others struggled to reduce the stigma of mental illness by promoting its biological basis.\
\
In a 2006 article published by the official journal of the American Psychiatric Association, Rissmiller and Rissmiller describe the collapse of the anti-psychiatry movement and its rebirth as the mental health consumer movement:\
\
>The formative years of this movement in the United States saw "survivors" promoting their antipsychiatry, self-determination message through small, disconnected groups, including the Insane Liberation Front, the Mental Patients' Liberation project, the Mental Patient's Liberation Front, and the Network Against Psychiatric Assault. The fragmented networks communicated through their annual Conference on Human Rights and Psychiatric Oppression (held from 1973 to 1985), through the ex-patient-run Madness Network News (from 1972 to 1986), and through the annual "Alternatives" conference funded by the National Institute of Mental Health for mental health consumers (from 1985 to the present)... The movement searched for a unifying medium through which to integrate. The growing Internet "global community" offered just such a medium. (2006:865)\
\
Rissmiller and Rissmiller's article generated a strong reaction from the activists they purported to speak for, who contested the article's characterizations and misrepresentations (Oaks, 2006b). In particular, the "psychiatric survivors" did not appreciate being labeled with the marginalizing "anti-psychiatry" moniker, a term they associated with psychiatrists who were critical of psychiatry, and not how they chose to describe themselves. They also refuted the overarching narrative of their movement's collapse in the face of psychiatry's so-called reforms. Rissmiller and Rissmiller exemplify the kinds of moderate, policy-oriented, mainstream activism that psychiatry was willing to engage. This kind of reform is characterized by organizations such as the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI), whose lobbying and advocacy often aligns closely with the Pharmaceutical lobby.\
\
NAMI's anti-stigma campaigns are good examples of this alignment. While reducing stigma around mental diversity is generally a positive development, NAMI's campaigns often come packaged in a suite of frames that promote disease models and pharmaceutical solutions. NAMI's anti-stigma campaigns denounce stigma, but in the same breath also reinforce the idea that patients are sick, there is no definitive cure, and they need to be on drugs for the rest of their lives. Their campaigns seek to medicalize mental distress, and are decidedly "on message" with Pharma's advertising campaigns. On the surface anti-stigma campaigns seem progressive, however, some of the practices they aim to de-stigmatize deserve closer scrutiny. Anti-stigma campaigns often whitewash and legitimize questionable practices under the guise of a progressive cause. Perhaps some conditions ought to be stigmatized? Perhaps prescribing anti-psychotics to toddlers is something that ought to carry some stigma? The psychiatric survivor movement was not satisfied with NAMI's kinds of reforms. They also denounced stigma, but rejected the language and categories that NAMI's campaigns endorsed.\
\
During this same period, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) published DSM-III (1980), III-R (1987), IV (1994) and IV-TR (2000), grounding their ever-expanding diagnostic nets on what Lewis describes as "an amazingly idealized notion of "theory neutrality" (2006: 1). Pharmaceutical companies introduced new therapeutic compounds (Barber, 2008; Whitaker, 2010), and marketed them directly to doctors and consumers on an unprecedented scale (Lane, 2008). Critics of the industry maintained that Big Pharma's business strategy was best understood as the manufacture and marketing of the chronic diseases for which they also sold the treatment (Mills, 2007).\
\
Mindfreedom International (formerly called the Support Coalition International), an important activist watchdog organization dedicated to "a nonviolent revolution in mental health care" (2012), tracked these developments, and engaged in forms of protest using tactics such as civil disobedience, strategic litigation, and generating coverage in the mainstream media. Academic research communities, such as The International Center for the Study of Psychiatry and Psychology (renamed The International Society for Ethical Psychology & Psychiatry in 2011), were "devoted to educating professionals and the public concerning the impact of mental health theories on public policy and the effects of therapeutic practices upon individual well-being, personal freedom, the family, and community values" (2012).}