{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #A method to this madness#\
\
The controversies surrounding the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex are tangled and emotionally charged. I do not intend to resolve them here. What I do insist, along with the new wave of mad resistance, is that the exploration of these questions and controversies should not be reserved to the medical establishment. The traditional human, social, and life sciences can and should bring the full force of their disciplines to bear on these questions. Additionally, media and communications studies are positioned to offer unique and valuable perspectives on these issues (Peters, 2009). The media and communicative environments that we inhabit shape our experiences, perspectives, and behaviors (McLuhan, 1964; Ong, 1982). These environments are undergoing revolutionary changes, and correspondingly, so is identity formation and social interaction (Castells, 1996). James Carey writes that "communication is a symbolic process whereby reality is produced, maintained, repaired, and transformed" (Carey, 1992: 23). Both McLuhan's and Carey's interdisciplinary approaches for studying media and communications as culture suggest a powerful stance for interrogating the representations of pharmaceuticals and mental illness in advertising, popular culture, and the press. McLuhan believed that "ideally, advertising aims at the goal of a programmed harmony among all human impulses and aspirations and endeavors," a claim that applies to psychiatry as easily as advertising (1964: 227). As more authoritative judgments are made through the interpretation of records gathered through institutional surveillance, diagnostic constructs and practices are subtly changing in response to this new form of scrutiny. Psychoactive drugs distort, deflect, and otherwise alter phenomenological experiences in ways that can be productively analyzed as a form of mediation. Just as traditional media mediate communications between senders and receivers, psychoactive drugs modulate cognitive and perceptual apparatuses, and effectively mediate experiences of reality. Like traditional media, these drugs shape our experiences, perspectives, and behaviors---our ways of seeing and being in the world.\
\
Much like familiar elements of our mainstream media ecology such as advertising and the press, psychiatric diagnoses and psychotropic drugs directly mediate and shape our experience of reality. They also, literally, mediate our behaviors, perceptions, desires, and expectations. An entire generation is growing up inhabiting a perpetually drugged-out existence, as their constitutive environment is regulated by drugs that sedate bodies and turn minds sluggish. Our youth's ways of seeing and being in the world are being actively shaped by diagnostic labels and mind-numbing drugs. Scholars, journalists, educators, and activists must work together to marshal all the methods at their disposal to comprehend and contain this burgeoning epidemic, where, by one measure, an astonishing 1 in 5 children are now considered mentally ill (U.S. Surgeon General, 1999).\
\
In this dissertation I tell the story of the emergence and transformation of a new wave of mad resistance. I do not attempt to reproduce the rich scholarship detailing the forms of psychiatric resistance that were prevalent in the second half of the 20\\textsuperscript\{th\} century (Morrison, 2005; Crossley, 2006). Rather, I summarize the salient characteristics of these historical movements in order to contrast them with emerging forms of protest and direct actions imagined and enacted by a new wave of mad resistance born into the networked society of the 1990s and the early twenty-first century.\
\
Coming to terms with a complex domain is a daunting task, for which Plato suggests a concrete methodology: "First, the comprehension of scattered particulars in one idea... Secondly, there is the faculty of division according to the natural idea or members." (Plato, 1999). James Carey articulates a strategy that closely mirrors Plato's in preparation for his analysis of the effects of the telegraph (Carey, 2007). "Concentrate on the effect of the telegraph on ordinary ideas: the coordinates of thought, the natural attitude, practical consciousness... not through frontal assault but, rather, through the detailed investigation of a couple of sites where those effects can be most clearly observed." This style of inquiry provides us with a basis for approaching the analysis of complexity which otherwise appear irreducible or intractable. Throughout this work I will investigate such sites in detail, where the effects I am describing can be most clearly observed.\
\
I approach these sites through a variety of methods, emphasizing ethnographic and participant observer approaches consistent with the inclusive values advocated by the groups I study. Throughout the psychiatric medical literature, patient's voices are systematically omitted, or, at best reduced to survey responses or numerical statistics. Qualitative approaches address this gap in evidence and represent a powerful way to capture a diversity of voices through interpretation and analysis. In an era when "evidence-based" methods have become code for exclusively quantitative methods, it is important to assert and demonstrate the value of rigorous, qualitative social science. Ethnographies are not a substitute for the direct participation of diverse stakeholders in the co-construction of knowledge, but work like this signals an important step in that direction.\
\
I also rely extensively on media content analysis, including mainstream, independent and grassroots. It is important to look at media representations about the activists, as well as ones that ignore or downplay them. It is also vital to learn about these issues and these communities through the stories that the activists themselves tell---about themselves and about the movement. My direct quotation, representation, interpretation, and synthesis of these stories form the core of my contribution to this discourse. My own voice is intermingled with the subjects I represent, in ways that I cannot fully separate. I attempt to indicate my own agendas and biases where possible, but this entire project should be read as my attempt to make sense of the current moment in the psychiatric-pharmaceutical industries, and the counter-cultural movements that resist them. As someone who identifies as both an academic and an activist, I strive to be forthright about my assumptions and convictions. I hope to present an argument that is accessible and convincing beyond the choirs of cultural studies and mad activists.\
\
Due to the sensitive nature of the subject matter, I rely heavily on publicly available primary sources. Despite the fact that many of these activists want to have their stories told, out of respect for their privacy, and in acknowledgement of the practical realities of stigma, I have decided to restrict myself to materials available publically on the web, including mailing lists and forums, unless otherwise noted. Many of the underground materials I draw upon are self-published, and their analysis is largely absent from the scholarly literature. This body of content is vast and difficult to navigate without the kinds of personal guidance and interactions I cultivated in my fieldwork. In each chapter I elaborate on the specific methods used for data collection and analysis. I open my conclusion by detailing my personal account of how I came to this research, and my own direct involvement as an activist within the movement.\
\
Mad activists use communication technologies extensively, and I will consider their usage throughout this analysis as an important substrate of the transformation in mad identity and politics that I trace. James Carey defines "models of communication" as "templates that guide, unavailing or not, concrete processes of human interaction, mass and interpersonal" (1992: 31). The communication models and technologies adopted by a group reflect their strategic, organizing, and decision making cultures (Kavada, 2013). These tools leave traces that provide important clues about the groups' politics and purpose. I do not argue for a causal relationship between these communication technologies and the group's values and organizing principles. The relationship between changes in social movement organizing and the concomitant improvements in communications technologies is undoubtedly complex. In an attempt to avoid simplistic explanations, I will consider the socio-technical environment holistically, without privileging deterministic narratives, or making unwarranted causal claims. Although it is difficult to demonstrate how social movements shape, and are shaped by, revolutions in media and communications technologies, it is interesting and valuable to study how movements leverage technologies, both tactically and strategically.\
\
}