{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Projecting Forward#\
\
In chapter 2, I set the stage for this transformation by illustrating dramatic expansions in psychiatry's diagnostic net and increasingly aggressive treatments. In the years leading up to the emergence of this new wave of mad resistance, the psychiatric establishment and the pharmaceutical industry were anything but idle. During this period, the rates of psychiatric diagnoses and treatments rose explosively, and psychiatric drugs became multi-billion-dollar blockbusters and household names.\
\
In this chapter, I focus on the story of the explosive rise in pediatric bipolar diagnoses and the emergence of preventative, or prodromal, diagnoses in order to paint a detailed backdrop of the conditions that gave rise to a new wave of mad resistance. The public is vaguely aware of over-diagnosis and over-prescription, but is largely unaware of the extent of the growth in psychiatric diagnosis and treatment. The mainstream media struggles to tell stories about mental health for a variety of reasons, including their exceeding complexity and perceived conflicts of interest with pharmaceutical advertising dollars. The psychiatric-pharmaceutical alliance grows relentlessly, and many of their most egregious over-reaches go unnoticed and unchallenged.\
\
In the years leading up to the publication of DSM-5 in 2013, controversies raged around the diagnosis and treatment of behavioral issues in children. The rise of the pediatric bipolar diagnosis, and especially the associated prodromal, or predictive diagnosis, is a case study that exemplifies the ways in which psychiatric judgment has generated controversy among mental health professionals, journalists, activists, and the public. Has the behavior of American youth grown more irritable and defiant, or has the adult judgment of their behavior changed? How can we explain the variations in diagnoses around the globe? Why are similar childhood and adolescent behaviors diagnosed in some settings and not in others? If there is a dramatic shift in youth behavior, what factors and dynamics might be precipitating these changes? How can we effectively study and explain these dramatic transformations in judgment and behavior?\
\
The case studies presented in Chapter 2 intend to provide a detailed examination of an area of dramatic expansion in psychiatric diagnosis and treatment as a window into the machinery of this process more generally. Other areas of diagnostic expansion, such as grief, shyness, anxiety, personality disorders, adult bipolar, psychotic risk, and other lifestyle disorders, vary in the particulars of their expansion, but display similar characteristic and trajectories. The lessons learned from the case of pediatric bipolar provides valuable insights to what is transpiring in the rest of the field.\
\
Through the detailed case study of pediatric bipolar and prodromal diagnoses, Chapter 2 tells the story of the manufacture of a diagnosis and development of psychiatry's alliance with the pharmaceutical industry during the decade leading up to the release of DSM 5. During this period, we also witnessed a pronounced transformation in mad activism, towards a new wave focused on asserting and demanding a voice. To demonstrate this trend I closely example two separate sites where we witness non-credentialed stakeholders being systematically marginalized and silenced.\
\
In Chapter 3 I present the fieldwork I conducted in Zuccotti Park during the Occupy Wall Street (OWS) protests. The first section of this chapter analyzes my experiences participating in OWS's "Support" working group, a group primarily composed of professional social workers, along with a few psychologists, psychiatrists, chaplains and others. Even among the liberal, progressive and radical activists in Zuccotti, radical mental health activists struggled to be heard. The non-credentialed peers faced systematic hurdles in voicing their concerns, and in many instances they felt silenced and marginalized by the professionals. In the second section of this chapter I analyze the collaborative production of _Mindful Occupation: Rising up Without Burning out_, a book that was the product of over fifty contributors, created by and for the Occupy Wall Street activists. I played a central role contributing to and organizing the production of this work and the contributors collaborating on _Mindful Occupation_ included mental health professionals as well as radical mental health activists. The book's content, as well as the controversies that erupted during its editing clearly illustrate this new wave of mad politics, articulated through their approach towards consensus and conflict resolution. Taken together, the contrast between conflict resolution in the Support meetings and the editing of _Mindful Occupation_ provide a thick study of authority and knowledge production around mental health in Zuccotti Park, and demonstrates the urgency for mad activists to advocate for their right to participate directly in the creation of systems governing their classification and support.\
\
Following a similar trajectory, Chapter 4 turns to the May 2012 American Psychiatric Association conference, held in Philadelphia. The conference previewed a draft of the controversial DSM-5, which was published the following year in 2013. A surge of activists and media converged on Philadelphia for the landmark unveiling of psychiatry's defining document. I attended activists' rallies and marches, official conference talks and poster sessions, and also witnessed a historic meeting of the Radical Psychiatric Caucus, whose members had invited activists and the media to participate in their yearly meeting. I closely analyze the speeches from the rallies, where I tease out evidence of the new wave of mad resistance, appearing side-by-side with its more orthodox c/s/x precursors. The two-hour meeting between the self-proclaimed radical psychiatrists and the mental health activists was filled with fire and vitriol. At one point, an activist slammed his hands on the table, donned a red clown nose, and rose to sing an anti-fascist protest song. Clearly, the constituencies were having great difficulty communicating. As with the professional mental health workers at Occupy Wall Street, even the "radical" psychiatrists had a difficult time truly listening to the mad activists---stakeholders without credentials.\
\
After demonstrating in Chapters 3 and 4 that the mad resistance is desperately struggling to be heard, even among the most liberal, progressive and radical contingents, I turn to the question---What would we hear if we listened? What have they been saying for the better part of a decade? Aspects of this new wave of messaging appeared throughout chapters 2-4, but in Chapter 5 I knit together these threads to examine the history, culture and ideology of The Icarus Project, a pivotal grassroots organization founded in 2002 that is at the forefront of reimagining community-driven mental health activism. The Icarus Project is the organization where my fieldwork was rooted, and both within and beyond the mad movement they are considered the avant-garde of mad activism. The Icarus project exists at the intersection of peer-support, activism, and media production and their birth coincided with the beginning of the Web 2.0 era, the rise of participatory culture and the popularization of digital networked activism. After twelve years of publishing books, films and artwork, hosting voluminous discussion boards and events, this chapter attempts to answer the question: What did The Icarus Project say? I attempt to answer this question by drawing on primary source materials. I examine the media that The Icarus Project and its membership have produced and published, alongside a detailed history of media coverage and an analysis of their communication infrastructure. I will describe how they have utilized digital media and web platforms to help diffuse stigma, redefine personal identity, and resist the relentless advance of the biomedical model of psychiatry. I will demonstrate that their evolving organizational model---whose genealogy can be traced through anarchism, punk, queer pride, harm reduction ("policies, programs and practices that aim primarily to reduce the adverse health, social and economic consequences of the use of legal and illegal psychoactive drugs without necessarily reducing drug consumption" (Harm Reduction International. (n.d.)) and permaculture ("a philosophy of working with, rather than against nature" (Mollison, 1997))---has informed their adoption of media and communication tools, and given rise to new forms of collective action.\
\
I conclude by examining how mainstream psychiatry itself is under attack from forces within the scientific establishment who question the biochemical model of illness and the utility of the DSM. This dispute poses a challenge for mad activism, too. The activists' messaging must adapt to these changes to remain relevant. Psychiatry is at a critical juncture, and many of the shifts underway challenge the mad movement's goals amid an extraordinary growth in psychiatric and pharmaceutical power. By studying cases that illuminate psychiatry's shifting boundaries we can gain more insight into the movement's ideology and recommend directions for future advocacy. We will see that the wave of mad resistance that I identify in this project is still nascent. It exists in an inchoate form, but has not yet been fully actualized. It is still searching for language and leadership to crystallize its vision, mobilize a broader constituency, and find solidarity with other anti-oppression movements involving, for example, prisoners, veterans, seniors, child advocates and the larger disability rights movement, all of which will be essential for the movement to flourish and prevail.}