{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \\chapter\{Introduction\}\\label\{chapter-one\}\
\
\\cleanchapterquote\{I will neither give a deadly drug to anybody if asked for it, nor will I make a suggestion to this effect... I will apply, for the benefit of the sick, all measures [that] are required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and therapeutic nihilism... I will not be ashamed to say "I know not,"... In purity and holiness I will guard my life and my art.\}\{Hippocratic Oath\}\{Hippocrates\} \
\
In August 2007 _The Onion_, a satirical publication with a track record of clever and incisive socio-cultural observations, ran a story with the headline "Woman Overjoyed By Giant Uterine Parasite" (2007). The story described the patient's happiness about the "golf ball\'96sized, nutrient-sapping organism embedded deep in the wall of her uterus". It also describes how this "endoparasitic ailment" is a "disorder [that] strikes without prejudice across racial, ethnic, and class lines", and its symptoms can include "nausea, vomiting, constipation, irritability, emotional instability, swollen or tender breasts, massive weight gain, severe loss of bone density, fatigue, insomnia". The author sustains a pitch-perfect deadpan tone for over 500 words, and describes the clinical dark sides of the creature "writhing restlessly inside her... robbing her of her strength and stamina". All this is juxtaposed with the patient's exuberance over the "miracle" and her excitement over telling her parents about the parasite. The readers are left to figure out for themselves that she's pregnant.\
\
E.B. White famously claimed that explaining a joke is like dissecting a frog. "Humor can be dissected, as a frog can, but the thing dies in the process and the innards are discouraging to any but the pure scientific mind" (White, 1941). While we might kill this joke through serious examination, it brilliantly captures an essential issue at the theoretical heart of the controversies surrounding mental health and wellness. This _Onion_ story is one of my favorite illustrations of the challenges we face when untangling facts from values. In purely factual terms, the _Onion's_ clinical description of pregnancy is accurate. However, the framing of the pregnant woman's condition, and the cynical and deprecating attitude applied to the shared underlying facts, succinctly illustrate the power of the narrator and the dominant narrative. Most humans throughout history have greeted pregnancy as a cause for celebration, even though it carries some negative consequences, including, in early eons, childbirth fever and early death for the mother. Healthy pregnancies are not typically categorized as 'disorders', even though the symptoms caused by pregnancy could very well be construed as such. Through humor, _The Onion_ illustrates the power of language, and the ways which narratives shape and distort consensual reality.\
\
The production of psychiatric knowledge currently shares many absurdities with the portrayal of pregnancy in _The Onion_. Psychiatry is wedded to an epistemology that is rooted in an outdated philosophy of science, clinging to a diminished conception of objectivity and scientific authority as a trump card that the psychiatric-pharmaceutical establishment uses to shut down and short circuit debate. Psychiatry is wedded to an impoverished vocabulary, and refuses to acknowledge the validity of alternative descriptions and understandings of experiences. Psychiatrists insist that their diagnostic language is the privileged or even the sole legitimate way to give an account of, and an explanation for, mental reality. Laboratory data in the forms of neuro-imaging, genetic sequencing and bio/blood-chemistry are offered as conclusive evidence that patients are broken and need to be fixed. These forms of evidence are wielded to bluntly assert the necessity of psychiatric diagnoses and treatment. The stakes here go beyond the binaries of illness or wellness--it is essential to acknowledge the real phenomena of emotional trauma, suffering, crisis and illness. The substantive controversy is about where and how these binary lines are drawn, what we call people on either side of the line, and who is involved in drawing them?\
\
This dissertation tells the story of an emerging wave of mad resistance which challenges the assumptions underlying this drawing of lines. A new generation of mad activists is struggling to assert their right to substantively engage in the conversation around their own identities and self-care. They want to participate in the production of the knowledge that governs their diagnosis and treatment, and they are questioning the very language and narrative frames used to talk about their mental health and wellness. Their argument, embodied in their stories, represents a dramatic shift from the anti-psychiatrist, psychiatric survivors, and consumer movements that preceded them.\
}