{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \\chapter\{You Are Not Alone: The Icarus Project and Psychosocial Wellbeing\}\\label\{chapter-five\}\
\
\\cleanchapterquote\{Stories matter. Many stories matter. Stories have been used to disposes and to malign. But, stories can also be used to empower and to humanize. Stories can break the dignity of a people, but stories can also repair that dignity.\}\{Chimamanda Adichei\}\{2009\} \
\
\
In the last two chapters we saw examples of mental health activists whose advocacy shifted from challenging the existence of mental illness to demanding a role in the production of psychiatric knowledge and greater control over narrating their own stories. We saw how non-credentialed mental health activists were silenced and marginalized by mental health professionals at Occupy Wall Street and by the psychiatrists who made up the APA's Radical Caucus. The mainstream mental health establishment demonstrates even less regard for activists' concerns, rarely acknowledging their existence, never mind respecting their viewpoint. In this chapter we will explore what these activists would say if they more carefully articulated their views and treatment recommendations, and why their own perspectives and vernaculars matter. In particular, we will closely examine an organization at the forefront of the mad movement's transformation\'97The Icarus Project.\
\
In the first decade of the 21\\textsuperscript\{st\} century, mental health activists reinvented the psychiatric survivor movement through a series of strategic overtures that borrowed from participatory culture and the possibilities opened up by communications technologies. This freshly reconstituted field of resistance to biopsychiatry and the pharmaceutical industry formed at a moment when networked actors sought collective empowerment and forged authentic connections in virtual spaces. These communities formed against the backdrop of an unprecedented expansion in psychiatric diagnosis and treatment, and at the intersection of the emergence of a more participatory internet, dubbed "Web 2.0" (O'Reilly, 2005), and a trend within social movements demanding greater inclusion (Kavada, 2013).\
\
During this period The Icarus Project developed hybrid models of peer-support and direct action that were, at times, accelerated and amplified, and at times overwhelmed and thwarted, by the proliferation of new communicative possibilities. The Icarus Project runs an independent community website with active blogs and forums; it publishes newsletters, articles, books, flyers, stickers, apparel, artwork, music and video; its facilitates mailing lists, social media and community conference calls; and, it organizes and hosts events, peer-support groups, and workshops. The project freely licensed all of their digital and print materials, and originally mobilized around free and open-source software (FOSS), and later, proprietary social media.\
\
The collective leadership has strived to create a participatory architecture supporting their commitments to access, advocacy, transparency, engagement and community building. These attempts were not always successful, and the project continues to grow in fits and starts, even a decade after its creation. The Icarus Project long has grappled with organizational instability, a bewildering proliferation of platforms and communication channels, internal conflict and unrest, and a deep ambivalence about digital interactions. These tumultuous organizational dynamics mirror the precarious emotional lives of its membership, and the project's perseverance is a testament to its resilience and the deep resonance of its messaging. At various times, the national collective or local chapters have stalled in the face of paralyzing organizational and communicative dysfunction, only to reboot with a fresh influx of members, energy, and, occasionally, funding.\
\
For over a decade The Icarus Project has generated and facilitated publications, conversations and events across a wide array of media platforms. All of this activity warrants close study in order to synthesize an understanding of the project's core beliefs. What did they say? How, if at all, can we weave their disparate strands of discourse into a coherent narrative? The project's history, culture and ideology provide us with important indications for how they believe mental health should be discussed and supported. The language and tactics they have cultivated suggest alternatives that can be adopted on a much larger scale.\
\
The Icarus Project conducts much of its discourse within peer-support groups, either face-to-face or online. These conversations are understood as safe spaces and are largely outside the boundaries of ethical ethnographic research. Accordingly, my analysis of the project focuses primarily on published media, communications infrastructure, and representative public projects and controversies that illustrate the way _Icaristas_, as members affectionately call each other, think and act. These snapshots are as diverse and fragmented as the project itself, and together provide a holistic perspective of the organization's identity and values.\
\
My selection of these discursive snapshots is based on my direct participation within the organization as well as numerous conversations and interviews since I began working with this project in 2005. In the next chapter I detail my introduction to the project and my personal involvement as an activist and organizer. My involvement included providing technical consulting and maintenance, participating in New York City support groups, strategic consulting for the national collective, and organizing public campaigns and events. My direct participation provides me with a unique vantage point for gathering primary sources, navigating convoluted histories, and critiquing the project, as a participant-observer.\
\
}