{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Preamble: Friends Make the Best Medicine#\
\
In 2002 Sascha "Scatter" DuBrul published a first-person narrative in the San Francisco Bay Guardian about his "poly-polar" experiences (DuBrul, 2002). He shares his intensely personal history of radical ideas, exhilarating states of mind, and eccentric, often dangerous, behaviors. He boldly came out of the mad closet, disclosing his psychiatric diagnosis, and recounted his history of repeated institutionalizations and over-medication. DuBrul's narrative about himself contained strong currents of social criticism (and heroism), and he contextualizes his own inner psychological struggles within the external reality of society's political struggles. Finally, he shares how psychiatry's labels make him feel, introducing us to the importance of struggles over language and framing:\
\
>But I feel so alienated sometimes, even by the language I find coming out of my mouth or that I type out on the computer screen. Words like "disorder," "disease," and "dysfunction" just seem so very hollow and crude. I feel like I'm speaking a foreign and clinical language that is useful for navigating my way though the current system but doesn't translate into my own internal vocabulary, where things are so much more fluid and complex. (DuBrul, 2002)\
\
_Bipolar World_ is not a traditional manifesto, but can be read as a form of what I call "narrative advocacy", a statement that blends intensely personal narratives, framed in the storyteller's language, with persuasive arguments that engage and resist dominant mainstream narratives. In _Bipolar World,_ DuBrul begins to recognize the power inherent in the language used to tell a story, and the implicit control that narrators exert over the language, metaphors, and imagery they invoke. The power he exercises through the deliberate choice of language for describing his history and condition, and his inclusions and exclusions, has been analyzed and explored in the classic discourse around "framing" in sociology and media studies (Goffman, 1974), and is a central problematic for Disability Studies (Davis, 1997) and the burgeoning discipline of Narrative Medicine (Charon, 2002; Lewis, 2011). This choice of language determines how seemingly objective facts are infused with value and meaning, as I considered in the introduction.\
\
In the documentary film _Crooked Beauty_ (Rosenthal, 2010a)_,_ Jacks Ashley McNamara retells their (Jacks prefers the pronouns 'they/them') initial encounter with DuBrul's story, replying with their own story, and recounting their dream of creating safe spaces for the exchange of stories, both in person and online:\
\
>I met Sascha because I had responded to a version of his life story that he had written and got published... about his experiences with madness, quote unquote, and wanting to live an authentic adventurous life and not crash and burn over and over because of the fragile fire in his brain. I ended up sending him my whole life story and he showed me all these emails he had been getting from people all over the country... he and I decided that there had to be a place for these people to read each other's stories and to know that they existed. And so we thought we would start up a website. It became The Icarus Project and it had way more than just a few stories, it became an interactive forum for people to talk to each other. And, just grew and mushroomed into this whole network of people all over the country. (Rosenthal, 2010b)\
\
The Icarus Project was born, then, in the nexus of two stories and expanded into a galaxy of networked storytellers \'96sharing, exchanging, generating meaningful wisdom and authentic narratives, spawning a pidgin language of empowerment and resistance in the process. These encounters were rarely simple. Local communities ebbed and flowed, often starting in a burst of exuberant enthusiasm, only to implode and collapse under the stressful demands of organizing, compounded by the emotional weight of peer support.\
\
The Icarus Project has achieved great success, positively impacting tens of thousands of people, and by many accounts, saving numerous lives. Throughout its existence, Icarus has also grappled with the problem maintaining resilience: (a) at the individual level of its membership facing the demons of heightened sensitivity and relapse; (b) at the local group level, as groups struggled for stability, combating burnout and struggling to maintain the capacity to listen and support each other through crisis; (c) online, with continuity often challenged as interlocutors arrived and disappeared without notice, and flamewars regularly erupted; and, (d) at the national level, as the national collective struggled with finances, governance models, internal strife, power dynamics, its relationship with local groups and organizer fatigue.\
\
Distinct patterns of dysfunction have emerged, and although the project's leadership has recognized many, they have proven difficult to break. For example, groups with the best intensions often discover they do not have the time, training or emotional capacity to support members in crisis. Some peer-support groups have fallen apart shouldering more responsibility than they could handle, and the pressures of supporting members has precipitated emotional chain reactions. Another example of a dysfunctional pattern is the predictable burnout of volunteer group facilitators. Peer-support facilitators typically bear the brunt of organizing responsibility. Groups often start out with multiple facilitators, but facilitators inevitably drop out, leaving an overwhelming responsibility on one person's shoulders. Eventually, the last facilitator succumbs to the pressure, and the group terminates when they quit.\
\
Some of these problems could be addressed with additional resources, such as funding for meeting spaces, facilitator salaries, and support for facilitator trainings, although others suggest inherent flaws in the support models. Throughout this turmoil the project successfully built a cohesive community, one that fulfilled the project's mission statement:\
\
>The Icarus Project envisions a new culture and language that resonates with our actual experiences of 'mental illness' rather than trying to fit our lives into a conventional framework. We are a network of people living with and/or affected by experiences that are often diagnosed and labeled as psychiatric conditions. We believe these experiences are mad gifts needing cultivation and care, rather than diseases or disorders. By joining together as individuals and as a community, the intertwined threads of madness, creativity, and collaboration can inspire hope and transformation in an oppressive and damaged world. Participation in The Icarus Project helps us overcome alienation and tap into the true potential that lies between brilliance and madness. (The Icarus Project, 2006b)\
\
One important aspect of the project that distinguished it from prior efforts was an understanding of the significance of fostering solidarity around subjective, first-person narratives, and the relevance of these stories to resistance and healing. The Project began to explore a liminal space between peer-support and activism. Traditionally, peer-support groups are private and introverted, and activism is public and extroverted. A tension exists between the quieter safe-spaces a peer-support group needs, and the louder provocative spaces that activists often intrude or agitate.\
\
Icaristas developed a strategy to balance the competing demands of peer-support and activism by focusing on the relationships between personal suffering and the conditions of structural violence and injustice in the world. Personal struggles were understood in sociopolitical contexts, and individual dysfunction was traced to the larger social systems of dysfunction that individuals are embedded in. Icaristas emphasized psychosocial explanations for emotional suffering and crisis, especially among those who exhibit "heightened sensitivities". They resist the prevailing "bio-bio-bio" model of explanation that neglects accounts of poverty, racism, intergenerational trauma and other forms of oppression in understanding the human condition. Simultaneously, these explanations never outright denied the influence of biology or an individual's personal responsibility for their behavior. The problems were not exclusively "out there" nor were they exclusively the product of what transpired inside someone's skull. The project attempted to embrace the non-deterministic interaction between nature and nurture, while incorporating a sociopolitical critique that aimed to hold institutions and states accountable alongside individuals.\
\
By emphasizing the direct connections between social injustice and personal trauma, many Icaristas discovered the benefits of treating activism as a "therapeutic substrate", finding tremendous value in the communal bonds that activism fosters. The phrase "therapeutic substrate" is meant to capture a psychological mechanism for working through personal issues by operating on similar issues, displaced onto an abstracted or symbolic terrain. I interacted with many Icaristas whose participation in activism around mental health issues provides an outlet for integrating disparate elements in their worlds\'97a way for their closeted mad identity and their public persona to converge. Mental health activism opens up a space for them to discuss mental heath without divulging their own experiences directly. Talking about mental health issues helps reduce the stigma around the topic, and enables activists to broach these topics from a position of relative power, within an activist movement, rather than as a vulnerable individual. Safe communal spaces encourage people to "come out" and tell their personal stories. Beyond the boundaries of the project's safe spaces, many Icaristas continue to engage publicly with political mental health issues without necessarily disclosing their personal psychiatric history. Their involvement in public discourses resists the monoculture of psychiatric knowledge production, and incorporates a diversity of perspectives that are ordinarily silenced by stigma.\
\
McNamara recalls that, early on, the Icarus Project "had some vague idea that, a key piece of recovering mental health had to do with building community... [and] becoming willing to trust other people on the planet." (Rosenthal, 2010b) The website, peer-support groups, activist campaigns, media publishing, art and music shows, and events all became ways for people to come together. At their best, they came together in solidarity, forged friendships, and learned that they were not alone. At their worst, participants emotionally overextended themselves, sabotaged relationships, and become unwell. Yet, I never met anyone who wished that they had never encountered Icarus, or felt that their investment was wasted. In fact, I met many who claimed that encountering Icarus materials, and joining a likeminded community had saved their lives. The intensity of interactions, with either positive or negative valences, left a memorable impact on almost everyone who passed through the project. Even those who grew disillusioned with the project's current form emerged with a newfound commitment to "overcome alienation" and "inspir[e] hope and transformation" in the world. The project's visions and aspirations were always grander than its ability to follow through, but the membership continues to pursue these dreams, and motivate others to follow.\
\
Unlike many in the previous generation of psychiatric survivors, Icarus refused to dogmatically condemn or judge anyone's _informed_ treatment choices. Informed consent is a difficult standard to meet, since accurate information is hard to find amidst the sea of Pharma's marketing and spin, and 'consent' is violated in cases of coercion and forced treatment. 'Consent' is also questionable in the context of treating children, prisoners, seniors in nursing homes, and other populations without full agency. However, in the case of free, informed, consenting adults, Icarus chooses to deeply respect an individual's choices regarding medication and self-identification. This acceptance stands in stark contrast to many elements of the anti-psychiatry and psychiatric survivor movements, who outright deny the existence of mental illness, and dismiss psychiatry and psychiatric labels and treatments. In this sense, the psychiatric survivor movement is guilty of committing an offense similar to that of the psychiatric establishment, by dictating to others how they should think and feel. The more extreme contingents of the old guard maintain that anyone who finds solace or support in psychiatric drugs or labels is being deceived, challenging the agency and self-definition that characterizes the new wave of mad resistance. Some Icaristas I met felt that the denial of mental illness negated their suffering and amounted to an "ableist" claim leveled by those who were high functioning against those who experienced disabilities.\
\
In contrast, The Icarus Project aims to create safe, supportive spaces for people to share their subjective narratives: spaces where people could teach each other how to "navigate the space between brilliance and madness." These spaces are often challenging for participants and what makes them "safe" are the explicit meeting agreements which we will examine shortly. The project aspires to be inclusive, welcoming those who take or refuse psychotropic medications, as well as proponents of alternative wellness plans. The project makes a crucial distinction between a strong stance for (or against) an individual's informed choices regarding pharmaceutical treatment, and a critique of the psychiatric establishment and the pharmaceutical industry. This distinction opens the space for them to embrace members who choose to take psychiatric drugs and accept their psychiatric labels, and still unite in their exploration of alternatives, their critique of psychiatry's abuses, and their opposition to the predatory practices of the industry. Their critique goes beyond the minority of psychiatrists, like those we met in Chapter 4, who are also critical of greedy pharmaceutical companies and widespread over diagnosis and overmedication. Their original mistrust was rooted in anarchist politics that mistrusted capitalism, consumerism, and "The Man". Beyond the simple account of Pharma's greedy profit motives, many Icaristas believe the stigma around mental illness feeds the isolation and alienation that, in turn, perpetuates and propels the capitalist system.\
\
As the project evolved, its membership refined their critique, as they became informed by the history of the mad movement, critical theory, and their interactions with students, academics, and experienced activists. Over time, Icaristas have downplayed some of the language that defined the project in its early years. Some have backed away from identifying themselves as part of the "Mad Pride" movement, as they called into question taking "pride" in negative states and behaviors, such as aggression or self-harm. They have also backed away from their original slogan, "Navigating the space between brilliance and madness", the title of the project's original publication. Icaristas have become more sensitive to those who do not characterize their mad journeys as "brilliant", and who feel alienated by the elitism of a slogan that dismisses "mediocre" madness. The project has also undertaken a major "decolonization" effort, in the hopes of extending its membership to minorities and the poor. Finally, Icarus continues to develop its understanding of accountability for their behavior in altered states, a complex ethical question that troubles and perplexes the membership.\
\
The Icarus Project evolved with a critical self-awareness of its own structures and processes. Deliberate efforts were made by the collective to model the kinds of power relations within the project that the membership desired to see in the world around them. These efforts sometimes fell flat, and the project progressed in punctuated bursts. Tensions between the online community, local chapters (who often did not engage in the online support forums) and the national organizers regularly threatened the project's coherence. The national organizers devoted so much energy to developing internal process that they were often accused of navel-gazing. They believed that a well- articulated governance model was crucial among "mad folk", especially important in accommodating extreme moods and heightened sensitivities. However, despite the leadership's best intensions, decision-making and accountability remained ambiguous throughout the project's history. They clung to an anarchist-inspired consensus-based decision model, but transparency and lines of communication were often muddled. Some decisions seemed unilateral, while others stalled in indecisive purgatory. The online community, largely composed of membership living in places where there was no local group, often complained that their needs were neglected. The national organizers often neglected the online spaces, and focused on organizing in-person groups and events. Local groups operated autonomously, and were often outside the loop of national's decisions and planning. The constituents were largely self-aware of these shortcomings, and regularly focused on trying to improve communication and trust, however progress was slow due to fuzzy goals, expansive scope and organizational turnover. In spite of these dysfunctions, the project has endured, experimenting with different governance models, and continuing to function and grow.\
\
In 2004, DuBrul and McNamara, fresh with an infusion of private funding, stepped back from their roles as co-founders and joined a larger collective that guided the project. The project's founding principles explicitly embrace consensus-driven, non-hierarchical, transparent decision-making \'96 across the project's governance, autonomous local collectives, and within peer-support groups. These principles also endorse non-violence, respect for diversity, anti-oppression, and access across identities, abilities, and class. DuBrul describes their 2005 mission statement as follows:\
\
>These were revolutionary words and acknowledged our relationship to history and our debt to the movements and cultural workers that had come before us. These words put us outside all the other organizations working in our field. They acknowledged to us and everyone else that we were taking a radical stance in the true meaning of radical: from the roots to the extremes. No one else in the field of mental health was talking about non-hierarchy and transparency the way we were. We were bringing the radical narratives and models into the door of the mainstream. (DuBrul, 2012)\
\
When DuBrul talks about radical, 'from the roots to the extremes', he means the project's ideas about mental health are radical, as well as their governance and processes. The organization he dreamt about was radical to the core, from its mission, to its organization and operations. The principles are echoed and embodied in the meeting agreements, which are collectively read at the beginning of all Icarus peer-support meetings. The preamble begins with a variation of the mission statement and then continues:\
\
> ... This is a space for people to come together and learn from each others' different views and experiences of madness. People who take psychiatric drugs are welcome here, as are people who don't take psychiatric drugs. People who use diagnosis categories to describe themselves are welcome, as are people who define themselves differently. The Icarus Project values self-determination and mutual support... (The Icarus Project, 2006a)\
\
The meeting agreements include basic actionable guidelines to "ensure inclusion, safety, and open dialog". The agreements specify practices such as: (a) "listening like allies", where peers are encouraged to adopt an empathetic stance, as opposed to a contrarian or adversarial one. In practice, this guideline is used to gently redirect feedback that is perceived as overly harsh or critical; (b) "stepping up, stepping back", a guideline encouraging quiet participants to speak up, and loud participants to give others a chance to speak. Good facilitators invoke this guideline to encourage shy or otherwise intimated participants to speak, and to try to contain willful personalities from dominating the conversation. This guideline is also invoked to provide typically marginalized participants, including women and minorities, a chance to set agendas and kick off discussions; (c) "practicing owl vision", a guideline intended to empower all of the participants to be mindful of the group's dynamics, and take collective responsibility for enforcing the guidelines without relying exclusively the facilitator; (d) "challenging prejudice", the meeting agreements explicitly acknowledge the group's commitment to eradicating social injustice, and affirm the connection of prejudice to emotional distress; (e) "respecting beliefs outside the mainstream", this agreement directly challenges the psychiatric medicalization of strange, nonconsensual beliefs. Provided they are non-violent and non-oppressive, participants agree not to judge spiritual, religious, conspiratorial, paranormal and other non-conventional beliefs that do not conform with the mainstream. Upholding this agreement is often fraught, since many non-consensual belief systems (e.g., conspiracy theories) contain seeds of oppression, and this also includes acceptance of alternative approaches to physical and mental health; (f) "using 'I' statements", a central, foundational agreement meant to steer people away from abstractions, generalizations, and so-called 'violent communication' (Rosenberg, 2003). 'Speaking from the I' helps avoid lecturing, grandstanding, and formulating statements in ways that are likely to antagonize others with different perspectives. Participants in Icarus groups regularly correct each other's speech by gently reminding them to speak from the 'I', just as a _Jeopardy!_ contestant is reminded to re-state their answer in the form of a question; (g) "paying attention to repeating patterns", This agreement is more difficult to attend to, as it implies a continuity between groups that is not always present. Good facilitators have tried to take this into account, and steer conversations to people's issues who have not received recent attention, and try to avoid recurring personality conflicts. However, confronting repeating patterns is arguably one of the reasons participants are attending peer-support groups. This agreement acknowledges that it can be difficult to notice repeating patterns, never mind disrupt them; and (h) "respecting confidentiality", an essential component of a safe space. In practice, this agreement is ambiguous, since peer support meetings sometimes meet in semi-public spaces, have fluctuating attendees, and are often hybrid support and organizing meetings, with the expectation that the organizing notes will be shared publicly. Topics resurface in meetings where new people are present and the original participants are not. Some groups interpret confidentiality to mean protecting people's identities, while others are adamant that even the stories told in groups should not be shared with outsiders. For these reasons, groups are encouraged to clarify their intent around confidentiality.\
\
The Icarus meeting agreements build on a history of activist meeting agreements, and extend them with a powerful template that should be widely adopted to other settings outside of mental health advocacy. These agreements are direct extensions of the project's core values that manage to effectively distill highbrow social theory by embodying it in day-to-day practice. In particular, encouraging everyone to "speak from the 'I'" helps minimize broad generalizations and the imposition of one person's beliefs onto someone else's identity. The meeting agreements reiterate the group's belief in autonomy and self-determination and reinforce the belief that all of us are the ultimate authority on our own well-being.\
\
Even with these sophisticated agreements in place, facilitating an Icarus peer-support is a stressful and exhausting responsibility. Icarus peer-support groups are notorious for forming in a burst of exuberant energy, and dissolving or imploding within a year. In practice, Icarus groups have struggled to enforce the meeting agreements, as one or two obstinate individuals can threaten a group's stability. Individuals have been asked to take breaks from groups, and on rare occasions people have been banned, however, without clear pre-defined behavioral boundaries, the process of asking someone to leave is fraught with politics and nearly impossible to enforce. The combination of heightened sensitivities and spirited energies, often crossed with wide differences in participant's age and class, creates volatile conditions for intimacy. Icarus groups have never established firm accountability guidelines, and it has historically been difficult to address conflicts that arise in groups. The very act of setting boundaries invites conflict, and the project has shied away from firm definitions, embracing ambiguity and fluidity in multiple contexts.\
\
For example, I once participated in a group where a participant refused to introduce himself along with his preferred gender pronoun. Like many other groups who attempt to create a welcoming atmosphere for queer participants, Icarus checkins typically begin with the participant introducing their name, followed by their preferred gender pronouns (he/him, she/her, they/them, ze/zir). This introduction is intended to make all participants feel welcome and comfortable, since having everyone specify their preferred pronoun avoids drawing attention to those who feel they need to clarify their own. For reasons he never articulated, one participant was unwilling to include his preferred pronoun in his introduction, making the larger group uncomfortable. The facilitator was at a loss for how to handle his defiance, and he continued to attend the meetings until he eventually dropped out, on his own accord, a few weeks later.\
\
Similarly, I have been a part of many support meetings where one participant has dominated the conversation, despite the agreement to "step up, step back". Local groups have developed various protocols for asking participants to take a break from the group, but conflicts recur. By their nature, support groups often draw participants who are in various emotional states, and a significant challenge of the model is trying to figure out ways to attract and retain participants who are in a relatively stable place, instead of only showing up to a peer support group while experiencing an extreme emotional crisis.\
\
Unsurprisingly, financial resources help stabilize support groups. Many groups struggle to find a meeting location, especially since many are uncomfortable in clinical spaces, such as hospitals. A small funding stream can secure suitable non-profit meetings spaces and light refreshments. Similarly, providing a salary for facilitators also improves the stability of the group. However, the challenges with The Icarus peer-support model likely extend beyond financial constraints. Building an authentic community is challenging work, and there is no formula for fabricating friendships. Some groups found that by organizing social events instead of peer-support groups they forged more genuine bonds. Others have proposed exploring a one-on-one sponsor model, similar to Alcoholics Anonymous, although no Icarus chapter has tried this yet.\
\
Many of the healthy, longer-running Icarus peer-support groups have been composed of a small number of regular participants (3-5), instead of a larger, fluctuating participant pool. A sustained commitment over time and continuity between groups has proven essential for forging intimate bonds and authentic relationships. In recognition of these dynamics, some local groups have experimented with capping the number of participants in their groups. Some have even defined a finite duration of the group (e.g., 6 or 8 months), as opposed to an open-ended engagement. This limited horizon is meant to address the inevitable power dynamics that may ossify within a fixed pool of supporters. These models are promising, and some Icaristas have talked about developing systems to help interested participants find a compatible Icarus "cell". On the surface, closed groups sound antithetical to the group's anarchist tendencies, but an open network of closed groups is more compatible, and could provide essential continuity to the organization over time.\
\
It is unclear if the project's failure to sustain peer-support groups over the long term represents a flaw in the model, the execution, or a combination of the two. What is clear is that the membership continues to be drawn towards peer-support, clinging to the idea and persevering in the face of repeated failures. In what may sound like a rose-colored interpretation, I believe these adaptations illustrate the project's fluid resilience, and not merely stubbornness, or simply history repeating itself. When the project reaches an impasse, it morphs and adapts to new circumstances, circumventing breakdown through creative reinventions. Some Icaristas give up and move on to other projects, taking with them the lessons they have learned, and often, lifelong friendships. Others continue to devote themselves to the project, tenaciously iterating, and struggling to improve upon models and processes.\
\
Historically, grassroots organizing has been plagued by cycles of intense activity followed by disruptive burnout. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://9C3C1AAA-B195-4A28-AA7E-5511DE24E0D8"}}{\fldrslt The core constituency of the The Icarus Project tends to amplify these dynamics since many of the participants exhibit behaviors that exacerbate these patterns.}} The activists attracted to the project at times exhibit aggressive, overbearing and self-centered behaviors, and at other times withdrawn, submissive and self-deprecating ones. These behaviors are common among activists, but magnified among people who struggle with altered states. Grassroots organizing is difficult in any context, and the challenges around organizing within communities that are struggling with deep trauma, emotional crises and neurological diversity amplifies and exaggerates these challenges. Icarus organizers are prone to inadvertently stumble upon each other's "triggers", as one person's madness (e.g., excessive interruptions or yelling) exacerbates another's sensitivities (e.g., a history of bullying or abuse).\
\
The project's day-to-day conflicts and long-term dysfunction are obstructive to their goal of manifesting solidarity. At the same time, this dysfunction creates a fertile ground for developing new languages, instigated by provocations that engage and intrigue its membership. In her recent dissertation, Erica Fletcher, a doctoral candidate at the Institute for the Medical Humanities at the University of Texas Medical Branch, has argued that the project's resilience, best understood as a function of its romantic aesthetic and heroic narrative, has maintained a strong sense of solidarity in spite of its dysfunction (2015). Fletcher's in depth ethnographic critique profiles the project's reliance on digital communication technologies, such as mailing lists, discussion boards and collaboration tools, that continually disappoint due to misuse, obsolescence, and "bitrot" (digital corrosion). These technological letdowns parallel the members' anticipation of their own personal and psychological collapses, and provide essential insights to the inner workings, and failings, of Icarus throughout its history.\
\
}