{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Discursive Snapshots#\
\
In the following snapshots I focus on the ways that the project publicly articulates its vision, and how this vision is sometimes realized.\
\
##Crooked Beauty##\
\
In 2010 Ken Rosenthal released a documentary film featuring Jacks Ashley McNamara, the co-founder of The Icarus Project (Rosenthal, 2010). Crooked Beauty artfully captures many essential aspects of the project's core message, and has been used regularly in Icarus-led presentations and workshops. Alongside _Navigating the Space_, the original graphic novel that DuBrul and McNamara released in 2003, the film has become one of the project's canonical pieces of media, shared by the membership and forging an "imagined community", in Benedict Anderson's sense of the phrase (2006). _Crooked Beauty_ has been instrumental in communal workshop and educational settings, where screenings are followed by facilitated conversations, and it also functions well as a standalone work. It deserves a close study since it was deliberately crafted to distill the essence of the projects' values. A close analysis of the film in context provides us with a powerful lens for understanding the The Icarus Project's message and the emerging movement it signals.\
\
The 30 minute film opens like a traditional documentary, with a medium close up shot of McNamara, narrating a poem:\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig01_cb_0064_Film_Poster.png\}\{Fig02_cb_00_33_7_Head_Shot.png\}\
\
> _And that late afternoon sadness,_\\newline\
>_rolls in like the luminous California fog, crossing over the hills._\\newline\
_And some part of me is convinced that I might have never really felt joy._\\newline\
_And yet there is a mythical quality to the garlic mustard,_\\newline\
_the afternoon, the angle of light that fills me with a peculiar, heartbreaking beauty._\\newline\
_And I wonder, as I often do, if things will ever be simple._\\newline\
_The train sounds down by the river._\\newline\
_The cloud passes over the sun._\\newline\
_And what could be memories feel like d\'e9j\'e0 vu._\\newline\
_Like they happened underwater a long time ago._ (0:11-0:49)\
\
This is the only depiction of McNamara's "talking head" throughout the entire piece. In film studies, _mise-en-sc\'e8ne_ refers to "everything that goes into the composition of a shot \'96 framing, movement of the camera and characters, lighting, set design and the visual environment, and sound." (Film Language Glossary, 2005). In a self-published essay about the conceptual and creative process of making _Crooked Beauty_, Rosenthal writes about his struggles with questions of representation and exploitation:\
\
>How could I recount [their] troubled history with compassion rather than exploitation typical of films about mental illness?... How would we see Jacks onscreen? The traditional model of the featured character speaking to an off-screen interviewer felt contrived and inauthentic because it deferred to an unseen authority. So I began to think outside of representation and more about embodiment. What if I dispensed with a talking head altogether and found symbols for the face of "madness"? (Rosenthal, 2010b).\
\
Rosenthal constructs a cinematic language that immerses the audience in the moods, themes, and experiences McNamara narrates.\
\
Light and shadows:\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{cb_0120.png\}\{cb_1634.png\} \
\
Urban and rural:\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{cb_0566\}\{cb_0751\} \
\
Technological and natural:\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{cb_0086\}\{cb_0724\} \
\
Explicitly leveraging film's primal relationship to light, he explores visual metaphors for "difference and conflict" in natural and urban landscapes. This imagery functions as visual counterparts to extreme moods and states of mind. The rhythm and pacing of his editing is accompanied by evocative sound effects (e.g. sprinklers, trains, rushing water) and a haunting original score. With the exception of the opening poem, the conscious decision to not show McNamara's face and body onscreen during their narration, in addition to silent, inter-titled segments, draws the audience into a first-person experience of the story.\
\
\\crookedimage\{Fig03_cb_0521_title_card.png\}\
\
Such techniques are intended to create a space for McNamara's story to become the audiences' story, with McNamara listening to _us,_ acting as a shamanic guide through a cinematic vision quest. Listening closely, McNamara doesn't always speak strictly from the 'I'. They often seamlessly transitions into 'We' statements to emphasize their critiques and recommendations. Although there is an implied 'I think' or 'I believe' around all of their propositions, _Crooked Beauty_ is a film, not a support group. As a leader in an activist organization with years of experience running workshops and support groups, they are entitled to 'speak for' those whose trust they have earned. Through a piece of public media, they have the opportunity to extrapolate beyond their own experiences, channeling the community they helped build while speaking for them.\
\
To analyze _Crooked Beauty's_ discursive style, I draw heavily on the primordial environment from which it sprung. The film organically absorbs and reflects The Icarus Project's values and aesthetics within its own poetic structure. _Crooked Beauty's_ particular formal structure is a powerful example of how storytelling can operate on multiple narrative levels simultaneously. The balanced interplay between contrasting narrative elements such as text/image, literal/metaphoric, personal/universal, mundane/metaphysical, illumination/shadow is articulated through cinema's fundamental grammar of light of dark.\
\
A textual analysis of McNamara's story provides us with many traditional examples of the power of narrative. McNamara eloquently reframes the pathologizing master narratives that dominate the discourse around mental illness and wellness. Narrating the emotional crisis that led to their hospitalization, they explain:\
\
\\crookedimage\{Fig04_cb_0343_prestigious.png\}\
\
>I went to a prestigious, private university. And at the time I was taking a class on the origin of life in the universe, and got totally convinced that if I could teach every high school student in America, that their bodies were made out of molecules that were born in the super novas of stars fifteen billion years ago, then we would all understand that we are all the same and there would be no injustice and no inequality and we would stop treating each other so badly. (Rosenthal, 2010a:5:22-5:44)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig05cb_0378_total_expansion.png\}\{Fig06_cb_0387_cosmic_connections.png\} \
\
>And so I'd gone through a period of just total expansion and incredible energy, and so much insight. But insight at a level where I couldn't really connect with other people. Your brain takes off into this level of cosmic and cerebral connections but your heart isn't working quite right. And, you can connect fifty thousand ideas, but you can't listen to your friend talk about her relationship. (5:52-6:28)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig07_cb_0396_divine_expanses.png\}\{Fig08_cb_0418_space_time.png\} \
\
>And so I went through a period which they would say is mania, all mental energy and connections and divine expanses of space and time and no grounding on the earth. And, then I crashed, really badly. And a lot of it for me was mixed up with drugs and alcohol. (6:30-6:46)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig09_cb_0436_utter_despair.png\}\{Fig10_cb_0451_drugs_alcohol.png\} \
\
>I slipped into such a state of total and utter depression and despair that I didn't know what day it was, I didn't shower, I didn't change my clothes. I didn't really eat. Stopped going to school, stopped doing work, stopped going outside, stopped talking to people. Every time I tried to watch the television I was convinced that the world was ending and I would run out of the room screaming and shake and hide in the corner. And I was snorting Ritalin so I could write my final exam papers and then blacking out on the floor. Finally my girlfriend ended up calling up my parents, "I can't take care of your daughter anymore. (6:55-7:28)\
\
\\crookedimage\{Fig11_cb_0459_daughter.png\}\
\
As a poet, McNamara has a deep understanding of how words convey different shades of meaning through inflection, connotation, and association. A cursory comparison with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders captures the contrast between a language of compassion and language of oppression. The DSM-IV-TR's definition of mania includes the following symptoms:\
\
>(1) Elevated or expansive mood "characterized by unceasing and unselective enthusiasm for interacting with people", (2) Inflated self-esteem such as giving "advice on matters about which he or she has no special knowledge" or claiming a special relationship with God, (3) Speech that is loud, rapid, difficult to interrupt, and often "full of jokes, puns, plays on words, and amusing irrelevancies", (4) A flight of ideas "i.e., a nearly continuous flow of accelerated speech, with abrupt changes from topic to topic, usually based on understandable relations", (5) Increased involvement in goal directed activity including "excessive planning of, and participation in, multiple activities (e.g., sexual, occupational, political, religious). (6) "God's voice may be heard explaining that the person has a special mission." (DSM-IV-TR, 2000)\
\
It should be evident to any who consider these two descriptions side by side that both McNamara and the DSM both leverage the power of narrative. The DSM's point of view is difficult to discern, indeed the book's producers attempted to assert an objective view from nowhere (Lewis, 2006), until it is juxtaposed against the rich backdrop of McNamara's personal experience. Once we read an alternative description of similar behaviors, the blunt force of the diagnostic frame comes into clearer focus.\
\
This comparison also demonstrates the power of inclusion and exclusion, as McNamara contextualizes their sensitivities against the backdrop of a cultural critique:\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig12_cb_0185_horse_fields.png\}\{Fig13_cb_0188_strip_malls.png\} \
\
>... I grew up in a region that was rapidly being developed and where, what used to be horse fields and meadows were being turned into strip malls, and condominiums, and corporate headquarters. Just watching the rape of this land... (3:00-3:13)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig14_cb_0222_strappings.png\}\{Fig15_cb_0243_sprit_unity_freedom.png\} \
\
>I started to really lose interest in a lot of the trappings of popular culture. All these messages about the kind of person I was supposed to be. The world around me was way more interesting than a television show. And what everyone talked about on the bus to school was movies and celebrities and I just didn't care. I wanted to talk about like love and loss and life and the meaning of human existence and spirit and unity and freedom, and that's not what 12-year-olds were talking about... (3:28-4:02)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig16_cb_0827_spirit_like_mine.png\}\{Fig17_cb_0835_capitalist_clock.png\} \
\
>If I was determined to live my life in a city and to work a really intensive, steady job in an office I think I would have to take medication to do that. But I don't think that fact means that I have a disease. I think that it means that it would take a pharmaceutical substance to override my instincts to make me capable of fitting into a system that was not designed for someone with a spirit like mine...\
\
>I'm just really sensitive and my moods shift in ways that I don't really keep a rhythm that fits with the clock of capitalist society. (13:45-14:24)\
\
\\crookedimage\{Fig18_cb_0842_rhythm.png\}\
\
In the course of narrating their story McNamara indicts capitalism, popular culture, the media, gentrification, urbanization, and the assumptions of the modern western lifestyle. The objectifying response they heard from psychiatry was "I'm a mood disorder with legs". Your life is insane because you have a biochemical problem. If you take these drugs religiously for the rest of your life, your life won't be insane." The ability to recognize the structural violence that McNamara feels oppressed by is entirely absent from psychiatry's response, again illustrating the power of framing, omission, and commission. We witness in this dialectic the forceful power of oppressive language, and the empowerment that comes from reclaiming languages of oppression. However, reclaiming this language still invokes it, and for many, healing involves supplanting this language with compassionate alternatives. _Crooked Beauty_ mobilizes this language of compassion to conjure authentic visions for thinking and speaking about "extreme states of consciousness".\
\
McNamara claims "there would be a lot, a lot less mental illness, quote unquote, in our society if people were given spaces to work through emotions like anger and grief instead of denying them and suppressing them, if we had a language of compassion." (Rosenthal, 2010a). Rosenthal provides a cinematic space for McNamara to tell their story, and as we listen to them work through their emotions, both McNamara and Rosenthal attempt to model the language they imagine. Through screenings and workshops the film seeks to recreate this compassionate space, introducing an empowering new language, and then stepping back to give participants the communal space to reflect on their own emotions and experiences.\
\
The alternative vision that McNamara promotes sounds simple and obvious, once articulated, but is tragically far from our current reality:\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig19_cb_0932\}\{Fig20_cb_0942\} \
\
>We need to stop saying, "You are crazy, stop being crazy." We need to stop putting all the focus and treatment on; How can we make you stop being the person you are? How can we stop telling you, that you are wrong if you experience these things? And how can we instead, help you to learn how to handle your sensitivities, that you might make the transition from having these sensitivities overwhelming you, to having these sensitivities be giving you information you can use? (15:40-16:12)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig21_cb_0949\}\{Fig22_cb_1016\} \
\
\
Beyond the obvious advantages of framing, _Crooked Beauty_ also captures the paradoxical power of complexity and contradiction. Life is messy and complicated; to pretend that it isn't denies our humanity and reduces subjectivity to a multiple-choice survey. By embracing the contradictory emotions inevitable in a complex world, the film avoids the common pitfall of romanticizing illness and denying suffering. McNamara describes their initial reactions to their biochemical diagnosis:\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig23_cb_0586\}\{Fig24_cb_0591\} \
\
>Part of me really wanted an answer that left me off the hook as far as responsibility went. And being told that I had a mental illness was both horrifying and very conveniently left me out of responsibility for my life. And it enabled me to recast everything that had happened to me up to that point as a result of this mental illness. And part of me hated that and part of me was totally relieved. 'Cuz then it was just like, "Oh, that's why it's all been so hard. I've just got this brain disorder." But, I don't think that's actually the whole answer, at all. (9:40-10:16)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig25_cb_0602\}\{Fig26_cb_0609\} \
\
Later, they elaborate on the beautiful and dark sides to all aspects of our reality \'96 material, psychological, social, and metaphysical---and their ambivalence over their ability to acutely perceive and experience these extremes.\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig27_cb_1047\}\{Fig28_cb_1054\} \
\
>The dead flower over there and the shadow over here and this person over there and the love letter over there and the map over here and the apocalypse over there and Walmart down there and the ocean and the children and... and in my mind they're all connected. And they're not separable... (17:28-17:44)\
\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig29_cb_1067\}\{Fig30_cb_1088\} \
\
>I don't just see beauty and light and god and grass. I see suffering and bodies rotting in the streets and injustice and a lot of pain and terror and fear also comes in. 'Cause the dark side of humanity is very, very, very real. And we don't want to think about that. There's moments when people have glimpses of what is luminous and transcendent and that's fantastic, but no one stays there. (18:01-18:23)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig31_cb_1142\}\{Fig32_cb_1196\} \
\
\
\
>God knows there have been more times in my life than I could ever count when I have been like please take this fucking thing away from me I don't want it. It is too painful, it is too much pain and suffering. You can have it back. Just let me close down and be like a normal person walking around the world. I don't want access to these frequencies. Can I please just shut the dial off? (18:29-18:52)\
\
\\crookedimagepair\{Fig33_cb_1283\}\{Fig34_cb_1779\} \
\
"Lilies and urine"; expansion and contraction; transcendence and despair; beauty and darkness. Narratives are able to represent a continuous spectrum of perspectives that are difficult\'96if not impossible\'96to capture through ordinary propositional discourse. McNamara's narration relates the ambiguity of their situation, raises questions instead of making categorical assertions, and depicts how their perspectives oscillated and transformed over time and space. It is around the representation of ambiguity and contradiction, as well as voice, that the language of cinema helps amplify McNamara's story and transform it into a cinematic vision quest.\
\
_Crooked Beauty_ embodies an emerging style of documentary filmmaking that blends and extends the boundaries of narrative advocacy and cinematic convention. The film is simultaneously an expression of hope and an act of resistance that powerfully captures a snapshot of the hierarchies of power in the domains of mental health and capitalist society at large. It defies many of the traditional sub-genres of documentary film \'96 it cannot be easily categorized as historical, investigative, issue-oriented, ethnographic, or biopic. _Crooked Beauty_ poignantly refutes the prevailing medical gaze towards mental illness through an intensely personal narrative spoken over a backdrop of visually poetic imagery. The film's storytelling embodies a distinct perspective that provokes and challenges mainstream diagnostic paradigms. Its discursive style resonates deeply with the language, aesthetics, and values that have been painstakingly cultivated over the years by communities of radical mental health activists in peer-support groups and workshops across the country. This holographic work is simultaneously an expression of hope and an act of resistance, and can be read as a post-modern manifesto \'96 one that often speaks from the subjective 'I's of personal experiences, and raises questions and contradictions instead of making grandiose assertions and categorical declarations.\
\
The complex tensions created by these interwoven narrative threads contribute to _Crooked Beauty's_ captivating hold. The work is rich with contradiction and complexity, demanding and deserving multiple viewings to fully appreciate it. It is neither exactly McNamara's story, nor is it exactly not. Similarly, it is neither exactly the origin story of The Icarus Project, nor is it exactly not. The settings where the film has been distributed and screened also inform its reception. It has screened at multiple film festivals, often followed by a panel of Icarus members and/or the director to facilitate audience discussion. It has been distributed at Icarus events, and Icarus continues to develop supporting curricular materials. It is even being used in professional training settings to educate mental health practitioners. Its multi-dimensional style suggests a simultaneous reinvention of the documentary and the traditional manifesto.\
\
Unlike mainstream documentaries that often talk _at_ the audience, _Crooked Beauty_ is designed as a space in which the audience can immerse themselves, and become narrators of their own stories, while employing McNamara's language of compassion. This is a grand ambition for a film as great cinema typically evokes admiration or contemplation, at best, and rarely such a degree of embodiment. Rosenthal's reciprocal technique is quite distinct from the conventions of mainstream storytelling, which are designed to provoke a compulsory identification with the protagonist, but not necessarily a first-person immersion in their experience. The line between identification and immersion is blurry, but Rosenthal's solution for avoiding the objectification or exploitation of his subject is to try to make them disappear, drawing the audience into the leading role. The viewer is meant to experience the emotional roller coaster the film for him/herself, beyond just identifying with Jacks. _Crooked Beauty_ employs the characteristically evocative power of poetry to transport the reader into the mindspace of the writer and directly experience McNamara's frame of mind. On occasions, especially when combined with a well facilitated, follow up workshop, _Crooked Beauty_ pulls off this feat.\
\
Crooked Beauty's central position as a formative piece of media helping to represent, and in turn define, The Icarus Project is a function and a testament to this accomplishment. The film enacts the change it advocates by modeling a language of compassion and liberation. It exercises this language through the performance of authentic narratives and allegorical storytelling. It also reaches beyond the representation of the narrative, and attempts to embody the narrative through a series of immersive storytelling techniques. These immersive techniques are designed to take the audience on a phenomenological journey which tracks the narrator's experience, taking the viewer beyond identification towards a direct experience of the moods, themes, and feelings expressed in the film.\
\
The audience responses to this film have been almost uniformly positive, and it has screened at almost thirty international film festivals, and has won over a dozen awards (Rosenthal, n.d.). Mental health professionals, academics, journalists, c/s/x activists as well as individuals struggling with their mental health have all found the film unique, provocative and powerful. I have participated in multiple workshops that opened with a screening of the film and participated in the conversations that followed. The film, combined with a skilled facilitator, helps create a conceptual clearing where people feel empowered to reclaim their own identities, to reevaluate the shame and stigma they feel about their own experiences, and even to try emancipating themselves from the alienation and isolation of psychiatry's dominant paradigm. A typical workshop engages the audience by asking them to share their own stories in response to the provocation of the film. Next, they separate into small groups and discuss questions such as "What am I like when I'm most alive?" "How do I know when I'm well?", and "What are the signs that you are struggling?." After a period of discussion, the groups reconvene and share the highlights of their conversations with the larger gathering. Often, remarkable patterns emerge that challenge the mainstream understandings of health and wellness. Participants described their newfound recognition for the power that labels and narratives wield in identity formation, and expressed how the film articulated ideas they have felt, but have been unable to put in words. These workshops would lead to the development of the ongoing Mad Maps project, described later in this chapter.\
}