{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Open Source, Open Minds##\
\
The project's day-to-day practice was also embodied in The Icarus Project's digital infrastructure, and during periods when the leadership flourished, they deliberately chose tools supporting the project's participatory values and collective governance. From its inception, The Icarus Project was conceptualized as a network, with its web site operating as an inclusive communal hub, not just a broadcast transmitter. Interaction and participation were essential\'97The Icarus Project goes beyond curating and disseminating media stories, and connecting disjoint groups. The project also aspires to democratize the production of psychiatric knowledge, and conceived of itself as an active listening space where the marginalized and their supporters would participate in sharing and exchanging their experiences, without judgment. At its best, the project has succeed in living up to this aspiration, although it has always struggled with stability\'97financial, organizational, and emotional. At other times, the site has functioned as the locus of conflict, or neglected to the point that there were barely enough resources and attention to pay the hosting provider and keep the domain name active.\
\
The site was imagined as a space, not a wall or a billboard, and members actively embraced the discussion boards, and contributed user-generated content in the form of links, blogs, photos, and event postings. The project also collectively produced numerous zines, paraphernalia, artworks, podcasts, videos, and events. Through these prolonged discourses, people shared diverse narratives and invented new frames for talking about mental health. DuBrul and McNamara designed a platform for activists to speak directly to each other, and these personal encounters fostered collective empowerment and communal engagement. Regular art shows encouraged membership to submit their own artwork, which were in turn, featured and celebrated at local events and on the website galleries. _Friends Make the Best Medicine_,published in 2007,included a template and a call for readers to create their own local support groups, lightly coordinated though the public web forums(2007). Will Hall's _Madness Radio_ show regularly featured guests from the community, as well as journalists, activists and academics from across the movement. The first segment of the hour-long show was always devoted to the guests' personal story, told in their own words, with Hall's warm and compassionate interview style.\
\
In 2003 DuBrul and McNamara wrote:\
\
>We would like this site to become a place that helps people like us feel less alienated, and allows us, both as individuals and as a community, to tap into the true potential that lies between brilliance and madness. (DuBrul & McNamara, 2003)\
\
At the outset, Icarus aligned itself with radical technology collectives, such as the Riseup.net collective and the May First/People Link. Unlike traditional hosting vendors, these organizations were devoted to social justice and independent media, and support a range of progressive activist organizations. These technical collectives managed the project's servers and mailing lists, providing secure hosting services that were organized like a cooperative instead of a corporation. These organizations strongly advocated for the use of free and open-source software (FOSS) based on their deep understanding of how these tools embodied the values of the causes they supported.\
\
FOSS ecologies have been a breeding ground for experimenting with various models of structure and governance, promoting constructionist learning and civic engagement within communities of practice (Coleman, 2012). Since writing software is an act of creative expression, it is often the case that the artifacts created by a software community capture the values of that community through the inclusion (and omission) of the software's metaphors and features. The recursive questioning of process and structure is a habitual pattern of programmer's thinking, and it is no surprise to see this analytical gaze turned back on itself. The community's proximity to the architecture of their own communication channels encourages a reflexive attitude towards their own communicative superstructure, a communal disposition that the anthropologist Chris Kelty describes as a "recursive public" (Kelty, 2008).\
\
Throughout the first decade of the 21\\textsuperscript\{st\} century, some members of The Icarus Project have recognized their deep ideological compatibility with free culture, and embraced FOSS tools and Creative Commons licensing at almost every turn. Although their original public-facing website was a custom proprietary implementation, the community forum was implemented using phpBB, a popular open source bulletin board system with flexible configuration that supported delegated moderation and pseudo-anonymous registration. The bulletin board software was deployed on an Icarus server, managed by May First, and Icarus had complete control over the software configuration and the data. The project went to great lengths to maintain civility on the discussion boards without instituting harsh, disciplinary tactics, such as banning. Volunteer moderators wrestled with this charge and worked heroically to facilitate discussions and mediate conflict. DuBrul describes the unique culture that developed in the forums:\
\
>We were attracting interesting people. We had discussion forums with names like _Alternate Dimensions or Psychotic Delusions_ and _Give Me Lithium or Give Me Meth_. There was nowhere else around that was explicitly a place where people who used psych meds and people who did not and people who identified with diagnostic categories and people who did not could all talk with each other and share stories. Because of the outreach in the anarchist and activist community there was a high percentage of creative people with a radical political analysis. And with the (seeming) anonymity of the Internet, people felt comfortable being honest and sharing intimate stories about their lives. Our website served as a refuge for a diverse group of people who were learning the ways in which {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://B1F80D3A-EC06-499B-B0D9-799DBB3A9531"}}{\fldrslt new narratives}} could be woven about their lives. (2012)\
\
Icarus governance evolved into a hub-and-spoke model, with local autonomous spokes meeting in person, running peer-support groups, organizing events, talks, screenings, and teach-ins. The collective was able to intermittently raise infusions of funding which also supported operational costs, like hosting, office space, and minimal part-time salaries. The national collective relied heavily on tools like free conference calling, mailing lists, and especially wiki software to support transparency in their decision-making and leadership. For the period between 2004-2008, all of the national collective's meeting agendas, minutes, and finances were shared publically on project's organizing wiki and available to the membership for review. Support for this organizational model relied heavily on tools developed in the FOSS community, in this case OpenPlans.org, a suite of open-source organizing tools developed by a non-profit dedicated to using technology to improve the way citizens interact.\
\
Icaristas have expressed a range of attitudes towards electronic communications\'97sometimes ambivalent, sometimes contradictory, sometimes hostile. There is a deep suspicion of digital communication, and many of the organizers express an aversion to screens and a strong preference for face-to-face communications. Some Icaristas engage the project exclusively online, others exclusively through face-to-face meetings and events, and some through a hybrid of online and in-person. The project has always been self-aware of the pitfalls of electronic communications, especially when negotiating conflict. In 2006 the collective published an "Email conflict Policy for Volunteers, Interns, and Staff" which stipulated:\
\
>The Icarus Project supports direct and clear lines of respectful and supportive communication in the event of grievance, conflict, or interpersonal difficulty. Such communication is best done face to face, or, if face to face is not possible, on the telephone.\
\
>No attempt should be made to resolve, process, debate or deal with interpersonal conflict issues of any kind over email. This includes discussion forums, instant messaging, chat rooms, blogs, commenting, etc.\
\
>Attempts to resolve conflicts or grievances over email have consistently been shown not only to fail, but to make matters worse. Email is an impersonal and misleading medium that while helpful in rapidly transmitting information, promotes miscommunication, misunderstanding, mistrust and confusion when it comes to interpersonal conflict and difficulty. (2006c)\
\
This email policy recognizes the shortcomings of digital communication that Rasmus Neilsen identified in his research on the use of email in political organizing (2009). The policy extends his findings that email communications within a group often lead to "miscommunication, overcommunication and communication overload", and recognizes an additional emotional layer of mistrust characteristic of the medium. I have not seen this policy adopted elsewhere, and to my knowledge The Icarus Project originated this language, based on experience and necessity. As with The Icarus Project's meeting agreements described above, the email conflict policy is widely applicable beyond mental health organizing, and other groups should consider adopting it to help manage internal conflicts.\
\
On numerous occasions a participant or moderator has linked to the email conflict policy and I have seen electronic conflicts averted. On many other occasions I have seen this policy flagrantly neglected or violated, often resulting in the outcomes it warns against. While this policy is difficult to enforce, at the very least it functions as an important reminder of the limitations of online peer-support forums, as experienced by the membership. Icaristas are a diverse group, with different backgrounds, priorities and communication styles. Conflicts erupt on a regular basis, group moderators work hard to mediate, and often burn themselves out in the process. Conflicts usually revolved around breakdowns in trust and miscommunication, and were exacerbated by the community's mad dispositions. Local groups were often wary of the national organizers, suspicious of information and community plans being withheld. As in any other community setting, gossip abounds, and mundane interpersonal conflicts spill over into community spaces. Few of the conflicts revolved specifically around mad issues, and most seemed typical of any activist community, at times amplified by the participant's sensitivities.\
\
The intensity of the interactions was often striking, but their substance was fairly mundane. Disagreements over the substantive issues the group was advocating for were surprisingly civil, and pages of long-form, thoughtful, exchanges were common. Popular topics of discussion include questioning the value of medication, struggling with side-effects of medication, sharing alternative wellness practices, and coping with the stress of family, friends and employment. A fixture of the forums is the daily "Roll Call", a forum devoted to people greeting each other online every day. The value of this forum was best appreciated when the site experienced an outage in 2015, and the community was shocked and outraged.\
\
It is one thing to recognize the pitfalls of electronic communication, and another thing altogether to transcend them. The realities of communication between and beyond Icaristas have presented extreme challenges. The project's self-awareness of these patterns feeds their continual efforts to improve these dynamics and break free of the repetition compulsion of these dramatic standoffs and implosions. Digital communications are fragile to start with, and their use within the project has only compounded the challenge. The national collective never developed a template or set of platform recommendations for local groups to follow, nor did they provide the infrastructure for local organizing, beyond the Forums, which were ill suited for sustained organizing and knowledge management. Groups were left to fend for themselves and for years wandered between a bewildering labyrinth of listservs, Yahoo! groups, Google groups, Facebook groups, even though many of these platforms were ill suited for these needs as well.\
\
The national collective also cycled through patterns of communication breakdown. It seemed that just as the group had settled on one communication channel, the listserv was renamed, or the group decided to relocate. Bitrot, or, digital corrosion, was constantly nipping at the heels of the project, as their MySpace archives, numerous listservs, and content fell victim to deterioration in the course of upgrades and neglect.\
\
In 2006, the public-facing website was rebuilt with Drupal, a FOSS content management system whose slogan is "Community Plumbing" and has a vibrant non-profit ecology. This new environment was intended to realize the original site's ambition of becoming a platform run by and for the membership. The site was designed to support distributed research across the community, as well as empower Icarus spokes with the tools they needed to organize locally. Although the Drupal site was successfully relaunched, the site's full capabilities were never realized. The national collective seemed stymied and blocked, and never took full advantage of the platform. These blocks may have been rooted in the challenge of generating fresh content rather than the technological hurdles, but for a variety of reasons the site never flourished. Funding shortages caught up to the project, and the membership was never trained on the site's new features. Significantly, around this time social networking platforms began competing for the attention of the membership.\
\
At the time of this writing, the site is once again undergoing a major overhaul. In the past few years the project has been losing its control over the dynamics of the discussion as conversations have migrated to social networks like Facebook and Twitter. These proprietary platforms pose a grave threat to the project's autonomy and values. When activists organize on these platforms commercial interests dictate the contours of the conversational spaces, not the membership's needs. In particular, many of the dynamics of the original forums, including pseudo-anonymity, communal discretion over membership and content, and long-term control over archival records, will be lost unless the community returns to platforms that are under its autonomous collective ownership. The form of interactions on the PHPbb forums is dramatically different than those on Facebook. The forums regularly hosted sprawling, long-form debates, while Facebook interactions are staccato and terse. It is incredibly difficult to sift through Facebook archives, and once a conversation falls off the wall, it only exists in the memories of the participants. Forum conversations regularly referenced earlier posts, and some threads endured for months, or even years.\
\
The drive to migrate is multi-fold. Over the past few years the rise in the popularity of Facebook, combined with the importance of mobile accessibility have pressured the project in this direction. A significant majority of the online participants access the site via their mobile devices, and the 2006 site was clunky and cumbersome, especially compared to the slick experiences of a modern social media site. Facebook also leverages powerful network effects, and since people are already spending large swaths of time on the platform it is much more convenient for them to interact there. According to Facebook's 2014 second quarter report, the average American spends 40 minutes per day on the site, a number that is certainly higher among the younger demographic that makes up The Icarus Project (Brustein, 2014). The collective also grappled with the fact that an unofficial Facebook group would likely form if they did not endorse one themselves.\
\
In the winter of 2013 an incident occurred within The Icarus Project's official Facebook group that illustrates the threat posed by this loss of autonomy. In December 2011 Facebook introduced a tool that enables users to report their friend's comments as spam, bullying or suicidal (Donald, 2011). Users could "flag" a comment and submit their report to Facebook, whereupon Facebook employees review the comment to determine if it complies with Facebook's community standards. One morning in November 2013, a member of the Icarus Facebook group woke up to an email from Facebook administrators encouraging them to call the national suicide hotline, without disclosing who had submitted the report about their comment. The recipient of this email experienced the message as cold and coarse, and immediately returned to the Icarus Facebook group and accused its members of snitching on them. The Icarus members all denied reporting the comment, and wondered if friends from a different Facebook group might have been responsible.\
\
The national suicide hotline has a reputation within the Icarus community for strongly endorsing the biomedical model and erring on the side of caution by forcefully encouraging medication compliance and summoning law enforcement to hospitalize the caller whenever there is any doubt. Icarus peer-support meetings have long practiced non-judgmental, active listening and most of the membership is fiercely opposed to the violence inherent in forceful coercion. Icaristas generally believe that sharing suicidal ideations is healthy and therapeutic, and the fear of being reported will inhibit people's willingness to share. Icarus peer-support groups have a long history of creating relatively safe spaces where people feel confident that sharing their darkest fantasies will not result in calls to authorities, followed by the inevitable involuntary hospitalization and treatment (with rare exceptions, under the most extreme circumstances). Facebook's architecture violated some of the most basic shared values of the group.\
\
After days of heated discussions, the group moderators began to preemptively delete comments that might be construed as suicidal. This adaptation is the response to what was described as an "absurdly coarse policy" that "fails to recognize diversity and context". In the summer of 2014, the group began discussing a Facebook exodus and a return to the Icarus managed forums. The situation is complicated since the people who remained on the Forums are wary of welcoming a massive influx of Facebook members, and it is currently unclear what platform will support group discussions moving forward, or if the discussion environments will begin operating independent of the Icarus collective and become self-governing.\
\
This incident of reporting a suicidal post on Facebook was not an isolated occurrence. Rather, it illustrates how embracing proprietary corporate tools can lead to environments that are deeply at odds with the project's core values. One Icarista I spoke with discussed his fears of honestly sharing his dark feelings on Facebook since he was "friends" with his family, and did not trust Facebook's privacy settings. There are even {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://CA050235-3773-4264-AC0C-F3A3B7AE0496"}}{\fldrslt stories}} of Icarus members being hospitalized on the basis of their Facebook posts, and more are sure to surface. One Icarista I know shared with me that her high frequency updates, and the erratic times of day they were posted, was used by her parents as evidence to her psychiatrist that she had relapsed to an "altered state", leading to her re-hospitalization. She claimed that the content of her updates was not all that strange, but the timestamps betrayed that she was not sleeping. While it is possible that posts to the Icarus forums could have been used in a similar fashion, the Icarus-controlled forums do not require that people use their real names, and are generally a much safer space for sharing fears and dark fantasies, with an expectation that people will actively listen without judging. Only when the project directly controls its communications software does the membership have the freedom to decide for themselves how to moderate and surveil their own spaces.\
\
Over the past decade The Icarus Project has gravitated to media that are consistent with their core values of transparency, empowerment and participation. From their in-person participatory workshop formats to the Kickstarter campaigns that have funded their collectively authored zines, the project has systematically attempted to emphasize the importance of incorporating the voices of their membership directly in their messages. Even the forays into platforms like Facebook, which is at odds with these convictions, has highlighted the project's commitments against the backdrop of tensions that emerged around its use. The relationship between a group's core values, organizational structure, and communications infrastructure is always complex, but we can clearly see strong correlations between these three pillars. The project's politics are enacted in the ways it acts and communicates, and the deliberate selection of distributed, participatory media reflects a fundamental commitment to the principle "Nothing about us, without us". These communicative modalities operationalize the ways that "us" can be present and express their voices.\
\
}