{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Addendum: Mad Maps#\
\
The Icarus Project is currently focusing on a major new initiative to develop a set of resources designed to help people create their own personal tools for self-care and peer-based support. This effort is a direct continuation of the project's initial vision, and has developed out of workshops, personal practices, and hardened experience.\
\
>For many years, members of The Icarus project have been imagining maps and roads and labyrinths that would lead us in our journey and ground us in the moment. These have been called "wellness maps" or "mad maps" \'96 reminder documents we create for ourselves and the people around us about our wellness goals, warning signs, strategies for health and who we trust to look out for our best interests when we're not at our best. (The Icarus Project, 2013)\
\
The project explicitly recognizes the authority of individuals to recognize and determine their own health and well being. In workshops conducted in 2014-15, participants were invited to describe the conditions and behaviors they associate with their own wellness, as well as their own struggles. These responses are being collected and curated into what can be thought of as the "people's DSM". In other words, the behaviors and coping mechanisms as described by the people experiencing, and sometimes struggling with, extreme states of consciousness will be indexed and cataloged into an interactive resource. The intent of this resource is to allow individuals to share and exchange their experiences, in their own words in the hope that their experiences will resonate with others. The emphasis on "grounding us in the moment" parallels the emphasis on "speaking from the I", as participants are encouraged to focus on the present, and avoid excessive preoccupations with the past or the future. In contrast to the cold and clinical diagnostic language of the DSM, the Mad Maps project is about trying to develop new ways of talking about mental health and wellness that resonate with the lived experiences of Icaristas.\
\
Mad Maps take a variety of forms, ranging from a few pages of text, to graphical diagrams and drawings. Typically, they are created by people when they are feeling healthy, and are an attempt to describe to themselves and their friends, what they are like when they are well, unwell, and techniques that have worked in the past to improve their condition. In ways, they resemble and extend the legal instrument of Psychiatric Advanced Directives, documents prepared by patients when they are mentally competent, stipulating instructions and preferences for care if they become ill (
\f1\fs24 National Resource Center on Psychiatric Advance Directives, n.d.)
\f0\fs28 . Psychiatric Advanced Directives are still relatively new, have not be tested in court, and are mostly restricted to specifying a patient's preferences for hospitals, medications, and electroconvulsive treatment. Mad maps are more encompassing, and often include agreements with specific friends, warning signs that the author and friends agree upon, and strategies for coping with those emerging conditions. People may designate a friend as their delegate, indicate their preference to distance themselves from their family, and recommend various tactics for coping with crisis, such as isolation, respite centers, music, art, etc. At their heart, Mad Maps are a reflective tool that help people to communicate with their friends and future selves, a reminder of what they are like when they are sick, what they are like when they are well, along with strategies for managing and traversing these altered states. \
}