{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Virtual Phenomenologic Interventions#\
\
The preceding thick descriptions of The Icarus Project help locate the project in the context of its forerunners. Experiments like R.D. Laing's Kingsley Hall (Laing, 1971) and Loren Mosher's Soteria Houses (Mosher, 1999) were intended to promote healing and liberation though the ethos of peer-support and mutual-aid, although they did not go as far to challenge hierarchy and promote horizontal equality. These experiments, with all of their blemishes and failures, represent alternative treatment regimes for acute emotional crises and can be viewed as antecedents to the Icarus approach of healing by-, and through-, participation within a therapeutic community.\
\
In his description of Kingsley Hall, a community center in East London that Laing converted in 1965 to a non-restraining, non-drugging schizophrenic treatment experiment. Laing writes: "Events have included painting, weaving, yoga, poetry readings, Indian temple dancing, exhibitions, films, and lectures on anthropology, psychiatry, the theater, etc.... Many people visited the Hall. Those living there, decided who they wished to see." (Laing, 1971:60) This vision of Kingsley Hall is sharply challenged by the version depicted in _Zone of the Interior_, a thinly disguised fictional account of Kingsley Hall written by its co-founder, Clancy Sigal (1976). In this account, Sigal paints a much starker picture of disconnects between Kingsley Hall's vision and its operation. Patients were neglected, drugged and abused, and Laing's megalomania was laid bare. After many reports of harassment from the local community, the project was shut down in 1970. Visitors to the hall included celebrities such as Timothy Leary, Allen Ginsberg and the Beatles, and often involved LSD experiments designed to help participants "break through".\
\
The Soteria method (from the Greek _\\Sigma\\omega\\tau\\eta\\rho\\acute\{\\iota\}\\alpha_ for "salvation" or "deliverance"), resembled Laing's Kingsley House, but was founded in America in 1971, and was not associated with psychedelics. Mosher describes the foundation of the method as follows:\
\
>Basically, the Soteria method can be characterized as the 24 hour a day application of interpersonal phenomenologic interventions by a nonprofessional staff, usually without neuroleptic drug treatment, in the context of a small, homelike, quiet, supportive, protective, and tolerant social environment. The core practice of interpersonal phenomenology focuses on the development of a nonintrusive, noncontrolling but actively empathetic relationship with the psychotic person without having to do anything explicitly therapeutic or controlling. In shorthand, it can be characterized as "being with," "standing by attentively," "trying to put your feet into the other person's shoes," or "being an LSD trip guide" (remember, this was the early 1970s in California). The aim is to develop, over time, a shared experience of the meaningfulness of the client's individual social context\'97current and historical.\
\
Note, there were no therapeutic "sessions" at Soteria. However, a great deal of "therapy" took place there as staff worked gently to build bridges, over time, between individuals' emotionally disorganized states to the life events that seemed to have precipitated their psychological disintegration. The context within the house was one of positive expectations that reorganization and reintegration would occur as a result of these seemingly minimalist interventions. (1999:146)\
\
These descriptions bear a strikingly similarity to DuBrul and McNamara's initial visioning statement:\
\
>... While many of us use mood-stabilizing drugs like Lithium to regulate and dampen the extremes of our manias and the hopeless depths of our depressions, others among us have learned how to control the mercurial nature of our moods through diet, exercise, and spiritual focus. Many of us make use of non-Western practices such as Chinese medicine, Yoga, and meditation. Often we find that we can handle ourselves better when we channel our tremendous energy into creation: some of us paint murals and write books, some of us convert diesel cars to run on vegetable oil and make gardens that are nourished with the waste water from our showers. In our own ways we're all struggling to create full and independent lives for ourselves where the ultimate goal is not just to survive, but to thrive. (2002)\
\
While the outcomes of the Kingsley Hall and Soteria experiments are still hotly disputed, some clear limitations of these earlier models are challenges with sustainability and difficulty scaling. Kingsley Hall hosted a total of 119 people between 1965 and 1970 (Laing, 1971), and each of the Soteria house cohorts numbered in the dozens (Matthews et al., 1979). In 2008, The Icarus Project website hosted five thousand unique visitors a month and maintains an active membership mailing list of over four thousand emails. An open challenge for The Icarus Project is overcoming the problem of sustaining a community over time that Soteria houses have historically struggled.\
\
More significant than the quantitative scale of these interventions, digital media facilitates the creation of alternative spaces through the inherent malleability of software (Manovich, 2001). In a virtual environment, the architectural constraints that influence the social dynamics of a community are actualized through software interfaces. As we have seen above, free and libre open-source software systems are especially well suited to the design of environments that cut against the mainstream. A virtual Soteria house would be difficult to maintain within the Facebook platform, alongside pharmaceutical advertisements and within an inherently volatile and insecure privacy setting. In contrast, The Icarus Project has recreated the essence of the Soteria house's phenomenological interventions through a hybrid online/offline networks organized around their shared multimedia publications and exchanges. Crucially, The Icarus Project extends the Soteria model by constructing a context where people who are not contending with an acute crisis can plan and organize. This model encourages experimentation that blends Soteria's peer-support model with traditional activism and protest.\
\
David Graeber's formulation of direct action is also helpful in theorizing The Icarus Project's contrast with the psychiatric survivor movements that preceded it.\
\
The reason anarchists like direct action is because it means refusing to recognize the legitimacy of structures of power. Or even the necessity of them. Nothing annoys forces of authority more than trying to bow out of the disciplinary game entirely and saying that we could just do things on our own. Direct action is a matter of acting as if you were already free. (Evans and Moses, 2011)\
\
Instead of exclusively protesting egregious abuses of institutional power, The Icarus Project activists, like the Soteria houses before them, assert their freedom by constructing and inhabiting the alternative worlds they envision. They explicitly struggle with the legitimacy of the structures of power that regulate their own organization, almost to a fault. The project's preoccupation with its own governance structure has been criticized as self-indulgent. The project has also been accused of being organizationally unaccountable, since they lack a traditional non-profit structure, with a well defined membership and board. Acting as if they are free may in fact be a euphemism for acting childishly, an essential aspect of the romance and the "uncivilizing" argument that Fletcher ascribes to the project in her dissertation (2015). \
\
The Icarus Project thrives when practicing peer-support, offering emotional first-aid, and caring for each other's basic needs. The project offers us a glimpse of alternatives to both mainstream biopsychiatry and 20th century psychiatric resistance. The psychiatric survivors' defiant rhetoric paradoxically reinforces the mainstream psychiatric frame by speaking for others and dictating how they should narrate their own experiences. For Icaristas_,_ radical mental health is about interconnectedness, diversity, embodied expertise, options, and politics. Community functions as the antidote to stigma, diffusing the isolation and alienation perpetuated and reinforced by a cold and inhumane system. The idea that community, peer-support, and mutual aid foster healing is barely acknowledged by the mainstream discourse.\
\
}