{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Conclusion#\
\
The field of mental health is undergoing rapid shifts along with most other fields of society and sectors of the economy. These revolutions are happening concurrently with our transition to a networked society, and it is tempting to claim that the Internet has given rise to one emerging practice or another. However, when considering the influence of communications tools on social movements it is crucial not to fetishize technology. At the same time, it is foolish to ignore it or dismiss its impact.\
\
In this chapter, instead of asking how the Internet has shaped The Icarus Project's communicative practices, I investigated their communications through a range of media. Although DuBrul does not enumerate participatory web culture as one of the original influences on The Icarus Project (2012), the Internet's capabilities are implied by the group's initial manifestation as a web site. The Icarus Project's longstanding slogan, "You Are Not Alone" is an undertaking that can only be realized in a networked society, where the web allows the long-tail of the neurologically diverse to locate each other and organize more easily than ever before in human history. The plummeting costs of production and distribution have enabled a range of independent publications, from books, to radio shows, to documentaries that, until recently, would be nearly impossible to produce without access to large amounts of capital. This media allows activists to talk back to psychiatry, promotes a diversity of voices, and galvanizes communities around issues and protests.\
\
Perhaps the most promising and elusive potential of these shiny new tools lies in their capacity to help activists manifest their visions, and sidestep protest through the construction of alternative worlds. Once built, these same activists now face the struggle of sustaining these worlds, often requiring far more energy than their initial creation. A history of convulsions, implosions, and disintegrations has plagued The Icarus Project, similar to the way it has plagued Soteria houses before it. Perhaps the ease of creating worlds only serves to amplify the effort required to sustain them. The proliferation of communicative modalities can lead to a cacophony of voices, unless there is an organizing principle, sometimes embodied in strong leadership, to harmonize them.\
\
Most significantly, this investigation traces the contours of a profound transition in psychiatric resistance. The Icarus Project represents a new wave of resistance, one that shifts from the ontological questions of the definition of disease and illness to the epistemological questions of whose stories and voices are considered in the production of psychiatric knowledge. This insistence on full-fledged participation in one's own healing, and more importantly, in healing by and through community, represents a new modality of protest joined to an alternative vision, one that goes beyond the discourse of human rights and individual choice. It is a modality of protest that meshes well with our "decentralized networked-era culture" and offers a path for taking direct action in the context of mental health.\
\
As we have seen, there is no singular set of demands that Icaristas are making on psychiatry. The unifying principle is their demand to participate in the production of psychiatric knowledge\'97to have a say in their own diagnosis, treatment and most importantly ownership over their own personal narrative. The Icarus Project is a space of experimentation, a clearing outside of the mainstream where people are beginning to redefine mental wellness, and are treating each other the way they want to be treated. In some respects the project is focused on creating alternatives that sidestep direct confrontation with the system. Icaristas are creating the kinds of spaces and protocols they would like to see in the world, prior to attempting to integrate these alternatives with mainstream psychiatry. From this perspective, The Icarus Project is currently concerned with setting its own table, rather than demanding a voice at anyone else's. Once this table is set, and people are nourished, they will be in a much stronger position to engage with the psychiatrists, CEOs, and politicians dining at the other tables of power.\
}