{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Unleashing Patient Power #\
\
The trope of patient empowerment was forced onto the mainstream agenda through the largely successful activism of the international direct action group, AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP)(Halperin, 1995; Epstein, 1996; Gould, 2009). In the early 80s, when the scourge of AIDS erupted in the United States, the government and pharmaceutical corporations were negligent in responding to the urgent needs of the afflicted. ACT UP formed to demand patient empowerment, and contingents within the group began conducting scientific research, drafting policies and protocols, and ultimately became leading experts on their own condition. They formed their own support groups, pooled their resources to collectively purchase experimental drugs that were not yet approved in the US, and staged vivid protests and direct actions, such as die-ins and the creation of alternative sexual education material. While ACT UP demanded new attention, research and drugs from pharmaceutical industry, and mental health activists are not especially interested in the development of new pharmaceuticals---one might say that they are demanding _less_ attention---there are interesting parallels in the underlying ideology of their demands.\
\
In his sociological account of the history of AIDS research and treatment, Stephen Epstein describes the interactions between traditional "insiders" and "outsiders" of scientific (and medical) knowledge production (1996). He argues that AIDS activists had transformed themselves from a "disease constituency'' to an "alternative basis of expertise'', whose contributions are especially evident in the politics of treatment. These activists played a key role in altering the way that biomedicine is conducted, challenging the morality of double-blind, placebo-controlled studies, and influencing the ways the FDA approves and speeds drugs through the approval process. Epstein claims that the AIDS crisis mobilized a critique of the medical-industrial complex, calling it to task for its lust for profit and control over patient's, and especially women's, bodies.  \
\
>The AIDS epidemic has magnified these various misgivings about doctors and researchers. Indeed, in the face of death and disease, popular ambivalence about biomedicine has undergone a peculiar amplification: distrust has been accentuated, but so has dependance. Despite their suspicion of expertise, people in advanced industrial societies typically expect doctors and scientists to protect them from illness and death. Yet, half a decade into the epidemic, researchers had not found an effective cure or vaccine. Scientists insist this is not surprising given the "normal" rate of progress in biomedical investigations. Nevertheless, the failure of experts to solve the problem of AIDS quickly, as they were "supposed to," has led to a "credibility crisis." This in turn has opened up more space for dissident positions, both among scientists and doctors and within the lay public. (p. 7)\
\
ACT UP's activisms represents one way that an "us" has made itself heard. In this case, the infected "us" accepted their designation as sick and became directly involved in fighting stigma, improving treatments, and searching for a cure. Some AIDS activists learned the languages of experts, and began participating directly in policy work and epidemiology research. Others asserted their expertise based on their lived experiences, and insisted that they should ultimately decide the degree of risk they were willing to take with experimental treatments. Their response accepted the medical model, though they vigorously contested the pejorative and moralizing judgements of gay lifestyles and demanded agency in deciding appropriate risks when pursuing a cure.  Their acceptance of the medical model was likely a function of the stark brutality of the progression of HIV and the widespread illness and death it caused.  \
}