{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset204 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # New Normals #\
\
The radical epistemology captured in the mantra "Nothing about us without us" is a recurring theme that has also shaped advocacy across defining struggles within the disability rights movement. In the past few decades, a variety of subcultures within the disability rights movement have spawned a range of responses to the credibility crisis, challenging the underlying assumptions of the externally imposed "us"es.  These responses vary in their acceptance of the language used by medical experts to describe and categorize the group, and often involve contestation over labels, as well as treatment. In contrast to the ACT UP activists, many disability activists question the medical model of disability, challenging frameworks which define disability as an "impairment" and which glorify "normal". Being diagnosed with HIV was universally considered a scourge, and no one claimed it represented an alternative lifestyle, as with some so-called disabilities. Throughout these sites of contestation we witness the value of democratic meaning making as these groups assert their identity in their own terms. This dynamic is most visible in the feedback loop that flows from the second, participatory "us" back to the first, externally imposed "us", as the group reclaims the power to name themselves and their concerns, prioritizing these concerns according to their own values.  \
\
## Listening to the Deaf ##\
\
In 1972, James Woodward, a professor of sociolinguistics and the co-director of the Centre for Sign Linguistics and Deaf Studies at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, introduced the distinction between deaf and Deaf, "to use the lowercase deaf when referring to the audiological condition of not hearing, and the uppercase Deaf when referring to a particular group of deaf people who share a language \'96 ASL and a culture.\'94 (1983).  Deaf culture represents a rich history and tradition, with distinct languages, norms and values, and Woodward's distinction was widely adopted within Deaf communities. In 1990, Paddy Ladd coined the term Deafhood in an attempt to:\
\
>define the existential state of Deaf 'being-in-the-world'. Hitherto, the medical term 'deafness' was used to subsume that experience within the larger category of 'hearing-impaired'... so the true nature of Deaf collective experience was rendered invisible. Deafhood is not seen as a finite state, but as a process by which Deaf individuals come to actualize their Deaf identity..."  (2003, p. ) \
\
Many in the Deaf community have fiercely defended their culture, most famously in the controversy surrounding cochlear implants (Tucker, 1998). The use of cochlear implants, especially in prelingual children, has been construed as an existential threat to the Deaf community, who question the effectiveness and morality of this invasive treatment, especially since the procedure is performed on children who are incapable of informed consent. Children with cochlear implants are often outcast from both the Deaf and hearing communities since the implants do not function well enough for them to learn spoken language naturally, and they are deprived from learning sign language. Even if the implants worked flawlessly Deaf activists would oppose them since they vehemently deny the pathologizing of their condition, arguing that deafness is a difference not a deficiency. Preventing children from participating in Deaf culture deprives them of their agency, and is systematically destroying Deaf culture. People without hearing impairments or who lost their hearing later in life are often surprised to encounter these perspectives, confident in their belief that hearing impairment is a deficiency. They are largely unfamiliar with the richness of Deaf culture, and are unaware that many people are fighting to preserve it. Deaf advocacy loudly demonstrates the importance of listening to a diversity voices before rushing to judgement around other people's experiences.\
  \
## Anything but Neurotypical  ##\
\
Ari Ne'eman is the founder of the Autism Self Advocacy Network (ASAN), a group founded in 2006 that believes that autism is a neurological difference, not a disease that needs to be cured. Their website states that "ASAN was started by autistic adults who were unhappy with the prevailing public dialogue on autism, believing that the autism world would be better served by ending the misguided search for a "cure" and focusing on empowering and supporting autistic people and all people with disabilities to live the lives we wanted." Ne'eman was diagnosed with Aspergers syndrome as a child and was frustrated that his schooling seemed focused on "normalizing" his behavior, not helping him thrive on his own terms (Hall, 2009). In 2009 he was appointed by President Obama to serve on the National Council on Disability, which makes recommendations to the president and Congress on disability issues (
\f1\fs24 Diament, 2010)
\f0\fs28 . \
ASAN uses the term "neourodiversity" to describe people on the autism spectrum. They call "normal" people "neurotypical" and resist attempts to pathologize autistic behaviors. Similar to Deaf activism, ASAN emphasizes difference instead of a normative deficiency, and advocate for acceptance of neurodiversity instead of forcing all human experience into a rigid mold. Unlike many mental health activists, ASAN activists embrace the neuro-biological causes of their differences, and are not threatened by a reductionist account of their condition. ASAN faces criticism for minimizing the suffering of more extreme autistic cases, characterized by self-harm and an inability to take care of their own basic needs. However, their advocacy is another example of the growing trend of advocating for diverse perspectives and respecting the value of lived experiences. \
\
>It was only when I started to read what other people were saying about us that it began to carry a meaning. And at first a very negative, frightening meaning. People do not talk about welcoming autistic people to their communities. People talk about fear and tragedy and burden. Initially it was very frightening. My saving grace was connecting with other autistic adults and finding out that there was this larger community of autistic people who weren\'92t willing to just passively accept how the world defines us... We founded ASAN, in part, because there was, and is, an extensive public conversation about autism that includes everyone except the people most impacted: those on the autism spectrum...  In the parent and provider community there\'92s more emphasis on trying to cure or fix us, and that\'92s not something we consider a priority. (Heim, 2015)\
\
Ne'eman's account describes the formation of an "us",  a community of people diagnosed with autism who resist accepting society's definition of them. They actively engage in conversations around how they should be understood and treated, once again illustrating the importance for society to listen to the very people they are trying to help. Their priorities are often surprisingly different than those imagined by well intentioned, would-be saviors.   \
 \
## Abnormal Growths  ##\
\
The passage of the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990 extended the anti-discrimination protections of the 1964 Civil Rights act to America's disabled. The academic field of Disability Studies emerged in the 1980s, and the Society for Disability studies was formed in 1986, was established as a "division of study" in the Modern Language Association in 2005, and is now a field of graduate or undergraduate study in over 35 US universities (Simon, 2013). In an essay titled "Constructing Normalcy", which opens Routledge's canonical Disabilities Studies Reader, Lennard Davis argues that the "application of the idea of a norm to human bodies creates the idea of deviance" and that "the conflation of disability with depravity expressed itself in the formulation of the 'defective class'" (1997). With a series of literary examples, he argues:  \
\
>[The normal] is a configuration that arises in a particular historical moment. It is part of a notion of progress, of industrialization, and of ideological consolidation of the power of the bourgeoisie. The implications of the hegemony of normalcy are profound and extend into the heart very heart of cultural production... One of the tasks for a developing consciousness of disability issues is the attempt, then, to reverse the hegemony of the normal and to institute alternative ways of thinking about the abnormal.  \
\
Questioning normal, and especially the structures and processes that determine it, is a central concern for disability studies. The field favors understanding disability as a social construct over understanding it according to the traditional medical model of impairment and handicap (Bickenbach, Chatterji, Badley, & \'dcst\'fcn, 1999). Disability scholars emphasizes that disability is a porous state and  everyone will be disabled at some point in their lives, either through injury, old age, or disease. Those who are not currently disabled are sometimes referred to as "temporarily able-bodied".\
 \
Disability activists share many concerns with mad activists, although they have not formed a stable coalition. Apart from their different subcultures and histories, some disability activists continue to harbor "sanist" attitudes, and shy away from associating with mentally diverse. Conversely, many mad activists are uncomfortable with the "disability" label, just as many in the Deaf and neurodiverse communities are. They do not view their difference as a disadvantage, rather they consider it a valued capacity, or a dangerous gift. Mad activists also face forms of oppression differentiating their issues from those of the mainstream disability rights movement. The mad contend with state sponsored coercion in the form of involuntary commitment and forced medication, and are habitually scapegoated as violent offenders. Despite the uniqueness of these issues, there are more similarities than differences between the movements, and solidarity is growing alongside awareness of each others concerns. The expansive growth of mental illness diagnosis and treatment has extended the relevance of these issues, and a significant portion of disability studies now engages in what has also been called madness studies. \
\
The emerging wave of mad resistance is situated in these cultural and theoretical contexts, and mad advocacy has begun to embrace these moves towards patient empowerment and self-identification. The kinds of claims exemplified by ACT UP  and the Deaf and neurodiverse activists create an essential backdrop for understanding the emerging radical mental health movement . Many of the arguments made by the new wave of mad resistance apply with equal force to the disabled, or otherwise marginalized groups. Closely studying of the power dynamics around the mad "us" offers crucial insights into the formation of medical, scientific and professional expertise, the validity of lived experience as evidence, and the power of narratives in the construction of identity. Society's process for defining normalcy is one that affects the mad, the disabled, the marginalized, and the temporarily able-bodied and able-minded alike.  \
}