{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Mad Voices# \
\
In the first decade of the 21\\textsuperscript\{st\} century, mad activists reinvented psychiatric resistance with a politics that deeply resonated with trends in activism and participatory culture, supported by a new generation of communications technologies. The Icarus Project, a leading organization at the forefront of this shift, developed hybrid models of peer-support and direct action that were accelerated and amplified by new communicative possibilities. They mobilized around free and open-source communications platforms, and constructed architectures of participation that supported their existing commitments to access, advocacy, transparency, expression, engagement, and community building. They foregrounded their personal stories, resisting the dehumanizing power of statistics and studies, and asserting the validity and importance of their lived experiences. I call this modality of activism "narrative advocacy", a form I describe in more depth throughout this dissertation. This rhetorical style reflects an important trend in activism exemplified by social movements including the Arab Spring, Occupy Wall Street, and Black Lives Matter, all of whom emphasized storytelling, insisting on the dignity of their subjects and using a barrage of personal stories of rank-and-file activists to advocate for change.\
\
Challenging psychiatric methods and paradigms, questioning the validity of pharmaceutical research, and protesting the political processes that shape mental health policy is nothing new. Activists have struggled for decades (Crossley, 2006), if not centuries (Foucault, 1965; Whitaker, 2003), to resist the imposition of the category of mental illness for the maintenance of hierarchical societies. Even according to historians who contest Foucault's simplistic account of madness in the Middle Ages, as presented in _Madness and Civilization_ (1965), the historical role of mad folk as society's outsiders subjected to the powerful, remains obvious. Erik Midelfort's _A History of Madness in Sixteenth-Century Germany_ emphasizes the real trauma and suffering exhibited by the mad, and the benevolent care afforded them in hospitals modeled on monasteries (2000). His argument with Foucault over historical specifics does not undermine the general shape of Foucault's argument, namely the identification of "power" as the mechanism which determines who is mad, and who is sane, even if Foucault's portrayal of the period turns out to be a caricature. Though some of the mad surely suffered, some of those accused of demonic possession and witchcraft were surely undeserving victims. Foucault also recommends studying sites of resistance to better comprehend the machinery and contours of power, a strategy I adopt in this dissertation.\
\
In the modern period, cultural theorists such as Brad Lewis and Jonathan Metzl have exposed the entrenched ideological and commercial interests that aggressively promote the hegemonic narratives that flatten minds into brains and reduce feelings to chemical reactions (Lewis, 2006; Metzl, 2010). In the 1990s, a wave of psychiatric resistance first self-identified as the "Mad Pride" movement emerged, advancing a more nuanced critique of mainstream perspectives on mental illness than earlier generations of anti-psychiatry activists and the consumer/survivor/ex-patient (c/s/x) movements (Coleman, 2008; Morrison, 2005; Crossley, 2006). This emergence marked a break from the orthodox psychiatric survivor movement that came before them.\
\
Like the gay/queer pride movement, whose name and politics directly inspired them, mad pride activists focused more on identity politics than human rights discourses. As the second wave feminists argued, "the personal is political", and this reframing of the issues opened up powerful new avenues of critique (Hanisch, 1969). This new wave of criticism did not entail any particular dogma around hospitalization, medication, or labels, but was rooted in challenging authority and the means by which knowledge is produced (DuBrul, 2012). What has opened up as a result is a whole field of linguistic contestation. The term "mad pride" is problematic, embraced by some and rejected by others in the movement it for reasons we will explore in Chapter 5. Currently, there is no recognized term identified with the new wing of the movement, aside from the generic "radical mental health" movement.\
\
The radical epistemology captured in the mantra "Nothing about us without us", succinctly represents this unnamed transformative shift (Charlton, 1998). Instead of simply resisting forced drugging and electroshock therapy, this new wave of mad resistance affirms an epistemology that diverges from the conventional medical model. They embrace liberation politics and stage direct actions that attempt to transform the language used to describe the mentally ill. They aspire to develop languages of compassion, celebrate their "dangerous gifts" through creative expression, and facilitate safe spaces for people to share their experiences and subjective narratives. Building on the work of earlier generations of activists who advocated for individual treatment choices and informed consent (Oaks, 2006), they encourage active participation in their healing communities, and insist that their voices and stories be heard and respected alongside those of experts and professionals. They believe that they are the experts on their own lives, and psychiatry needs to act in consulation with them on decisions governing their treatment and health.\
\
The transformational shift in this emerging wave of resistance can be construed as a shift from advocating for a particular ontology to advocating for a new epistemology. More than a discursive face-off disputing the nature of reality, the disagreement focuses on the question of how to approach controversies and establish consensus. For example, many anti-psychiatrists and psychiatric survivors in the 1970s have argued (and still continue to argue) that there is no such thing as mental illness. I argue that the newly emerging wave of mad resistance operates on a different plane. It is more concerned with ensuring that all of the relevant stakeholders have seats at the tables of power, where their voices can be included in the production of psychiatric knowledge. First and foremost is the primacy of their own voices in the understanding of their situation and the co-creation of their stories. Crucially, their insistence on co-constructing their own identities and narratives underlies their platforms, critiques, and actions.}