{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Meeting Pre-ramble##\
\
One way to gain a better appreciation of their principles is by studying their meeting agreements, which are collectively read at the beginning of all Icarus peer-support meetings. The preamble begins with a variation of the mission statement and then continues:\
\
> ... This is a space for people to come together and learn from each others' different views and experiences of madness. People who take psychiatric drugs are welcome here, as are people who don't take psychiatric drugs. People who use diagnosis categories to describe themselves are welcome, as are people who define themselves differently. The Icarus Project values self-determination and mutual support... (The Icarus Project, 2006a)\
\
The meeting agreements include basic actionable guidelines to "ensure inclusion, safety, and open dialog". The agreements specify practices such as: (a) "listening like allies", where peers are encouraged to adopt an empathetic stance, as opposed to a contrarian or adversarial one. In practice, this guideline is used to gently redirect feedback that is perceived as overly harsh or critical; (b) "stepping up, stepping back", a guideline encouraging quiet participants to speak up, and loud participants to give others a chance to speak. Good facilitators invoke this guideline to encourage shy or otherwise intimated participants to speak, and to try to contain willful personalities from dominating the conversation. This guideline is also invoked to provide typically marginalized participants, including women and minorities, a chance to set agendas and kick off discussions; (c) "practicing owl vision", a guideline intended to empower all of the participants to be mindful of the group's dynamics, and take collective responsibility for enforcing the guidelines without relying exclusively the facilitator; (d) "challenging prejudice", the meeting agreements explicitly acknowledge the group's commitment to eradicating social injustice, and affirm the connection of prejudice to emotional distress; (e) "respecting beliefs outside the mainstream", this agreement directly challenges the psychiatric medicalization of strange, nonconsensual beliefs. Provided they are non-violent and non-oppressive, participants agree not to judge spiritual, religious, conspiratorial, paranormal and other non-conventional beliefs that do not conform with the mainstream. Upholding this agreement is often fraught, since many non-consensual belief systems (e.g., conspiracy theories) contain seeds of oppression, and this also includes acceptance of alternative approaches to physical and mental health; (f) "using 'I' statements", a central, foundational agreement meant to steer people away from abstractions, generalizations, and so-called 'violent communication' (Rosenberg, 2003). 'Speaking from the I' helps avoid lecturing, grandstanding, and formulating statements in ways that are likely to antagonize others with different perspectives. Participants in Icarus groups regularly correct each other's speech by gently reminding them to speak from the 'I', just as a _Jeopardy!_ contestant is reminded to re-state their answer in the form of a question; (g) "paying attention to repeating patterns", This agreement is more difficult to attend to, as it implies a continuity between groups that is not always present. Good facilitators have tried to take this into account, and steer conversations to people's issues who have not received recent attention, and try to avoid recurring personality conflicts. However, confronting repeating patterns is arguably one of the reasons participants are attending peer-support groups. This agreement acknowledges that it can be difficult to notice repeating patterns, never mind disrupt them; and (h) "respecting confidentiality", an essential component of a safe space. In practice, this agreement is ambiguous, since peer support meetings sometimes meet in semi-public spaces, have fluctuating attendees, and are often hybrid support and organizing meetings, with the expectation that the organizing notes will be shared publicly. Topics resurface in meetings where new people are present and the original participants are not. Some groups interpret confidentiality to mean protecting people's identities, while others are adamant that even the stories told in groups should not be shared with outsiders. For these reasons, groups are encouraged to clarify their intent around confidentiality.\
\
The Icarus meeting agreements build on a history of activist meeting agreements, and extend them with a powerful template that should be widely adopted to other settings outside of mental health advocacy. These agreements are direct extensions of the project's core values that manage to effectively distill highbrow social theory by embodying it in day-to-day practice. In particular, encouraging everyone to "speak from the 'I'" helps minimize broad generalizations and the imposition of one person's beliefs onto someone else's identity. The meeting agreements reiterate the group's belief in autonomy and self-determination and reinforce the belief that all of us are the ultimate authority on our own well-being.\
\
Even with these sophisticated agreements in place, facilitating an Icarus peer-support is a stressful and exhausting responsibility. Icarus peer-support groups are notorious for forming in a burst of exuberant energy, and dissolving or imploding within a year. In practice, Icarus groups have struggled to enforce the meeting agreements, as one or two obstinate individuals can threaten a group's stability. Individuals have been asked to take breaks from groups, and on rare occasions people have been banned, however, without clear pre-defined behavioral boundaries, the process of asking someone to leave is fraught with politics and nearly impossible to enforce. The combination of heightened sensitivities and spirited energies, often crossed with wide differences in participant's age and class, creates volatile conditions for intimacy. Icarus groups have never established firm accountability guidelines, and it has historically been difficult to address conflicts that arise in groups. The very act of setting boundaries invites conflict, and the project has shied away from firm definitions, embracing ambiguity and fluidity in multiple contexts.\
\
For example, I once participated in a group where a participant refused to introduce himself along with his preferred gender pronoun. Like many other groups who attempt to create a welcoming atmosphere for queer participants, Icarus checkins typically begin with the participant introducing their name, followed by their preferred gender pronouns (he/him, she/her, they/them, ze/zir). This introduction is intended to make all participants feel welcome and comfortable, since having everyone specify their preferred pronoun avoids drawing attention to those who feel they need to clarify their own. For reasons he never articulated, one participant was unwilling to include his preferred pronoun in his introduction, making the larger group uncomfortable. The facilitator was at a loss for how to handle his defiance, and he continued to attend the meetings until he eventually dropped out, on his own accord, a few weeks later.\
\
Similarly, I have been a part of many support meetings where one participant has dominated the conversation, despite the agreement to "step up, step back". Local groups have developed various protocols for asking participants to take a break from the group, but conflicts recur. By their nature, support groups often draw participants who are in various emotional states, and a significant challenge of the model is trying to figure out ways to attract and retain participants who are in a relatively stable place, instead of only showing up to a peer support group while experiencing an extreme emotional crisis.\
\
Unsurprisingly, financial resources help stabilize support groups. Many groups struggle to find a meeting location, especially since many are uncomfortable in clinical spaces, such as hospitals. A small funding stream can secure suitable non-profit meetings spaces and light refreshments. Similarly, providing a salary for facilitators also improves the stability of the group. However, the challenges with The Icarus peer-support model likely extend beyond financial constraints. Building an authentic community is challenging work, and there is no formula for fabricating friendships. Some groups found that by organizing social events instead of peer-support groups they forged more genuine bonds. Others have proposed exploring a one-on-one sponsor model, similar to Alcoholics Anonymous, although no Icarus chapter has tried this yet.\
\
Many of the healthy, longer-running Icarus peer-support groups have been composed of a small number of regular participants (3-5), instead of a larger, fluctuating participant pool. A sustained commitment over time and continuity between groups has proven essential for forging intimate bonds and authentic relationships. In recognition of these dynamics, some local groups have experimented with capping the number of participants in their groups. Some have even defined a finite duration of the group (e.g., 6 or 8 months), as opposed to an open-ended engagement. This limited horizon is meant to address the inevitable power dynamics that may ossify within a fixed pool of supporters. These models are promising, and some Icaristas have talked about developing systems to help interested participants find a compatible Icarus "cell". On the surface, closed groups sound antithetical to the group's anarchist tendencies, but an open network of closed groups is more compatible, and could provide essential continuity to the organization over time.\
\
It is unclear if the project's failure to sustain peer-support groups over the long term represents a flaw in the model, the execution, or a combination of the two. What is clear is that the membership continues to be drawn towards peer-support, clinging to the idea and persevering in the face of repeated failures. In what may sound like a rose-colored interpretation, I believe these adaptations illustrate the project's fluid resilience, and not merely stubbornness, or simply history repeating itself. When the project reaches an impasse, it morphs and adapts to new circumstances, circumventing breakdown through creative reinventions. Some Icaristas give up and move on to other projects, taking with them the lessons they have learned, and often, lifelong friendships. Others continue to devote themselves to the project, tenaciously iterating, and struggling to improve upon models and processes.\
\
Historically, grassroots organizing has been plagued by cycles of intense activity followed by disruptive burnout. The core constituency of the The Icarus Project tends to amplify these dynamics since many of the participants exhibit behaviors that exacerbate these patterns. The activists attracted to the project at times exhibit aggressive, overbearing and self-centered behaviors, and at other times withdrawn, submissive and self-deprecating ones. These behaviors are common among activists, but magnified among people who struggle with altered states. Grassroots organizing is difficult in any context, and the challenges around organizing within communities that are struggling with deep trauma, emotional crises and neurological diversity amplifies and exaggerates these challenges. Icarus organizers are prone to inadvertently stumble upon each other's "triggers", as one person's madness (e.g., excessive interruptions or yelling) exacerbates another's sensitivities (e.g., a history of bullying or abuse).\
\
The project's day-to-day conflicts and long-term dysfunction are obstructive to their goal of manifesting solidarity. At the same time, this dysfunction creates a fertile ground for developing new languages, instigated by provocations that engage and intrigue its membership. In her recent dissertation, Erica Fletcher, a doctoral candidate at the Institute for the Medical Humanities at the University of Texas Medical Branch, has argued that the project's resilience, best understood as a function of its romantic aesthetic and heroic narrative, has maintained a strong sense of solidarity in spite of its dysfunction (2015). Fletcher's in depth ethnographic critique profiles the project's reliance on digital communication technologies, such as mailing lists, discussion boards and collaboration tools, that continually disappoint due to misuse, obsolescence, and "bitrot" (digital corrosion). These technological letdowns parallel the members' anticipation of their own personal and psychological collapses, and provide essential insights to the inner workings, and failings, of Icarus throughout its history.\
\
}