{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \\chapter\{Counterfactual Cures: Manufacturing Disease and Dissent\}\\label\{chapter-two\}\
\
\\cleanchapterquote\{Drugs! What'd they give you? Thorazine? Haldol? How much? Learn your drugs \'97 know your doses. It's elementary\\ldots\}\{Jeffery Goines\}\{12 Monkeys\} \
\
The transformation in resistance to the psychiatric-pharmaceutical establishment I describe in this dissertation is best understood against the backdrop of the expansive growth in psychiatric diagnosis and treatment witnessed globally over the past two decades (Angell, 2004a; Barber, 2008; Frances, 2014a). The statistics describing this growth tell a powerful and convincing story. To gain a more visceral appreciation of this period of growth it is also useful to closely examine a specific site of psychiatric-pharmaceutical expansion, the diagnosis and treatment of children. The tactics employed by the pharmaceutical industry around the marketing of these new diseases and treatments have become typical, and are employed with other populations\'97e.g., prisoners, veterans, and seniors\'97and, around other conditions, such as anxiety, shyness and attention. It is valuable to consider this example in detail to fully appreciate the machinations of this industrial golem.\
\
In this chapter I describe the reinvention of the _pediatric bipolar_ diagnosis, and consider the implications of _prodromal diagnosis_, also known as _psychotic risk syndrome_. A prodrome is a symptom, or group of symptoms, that appears shortly before an acute attack of illness, and a prodromal diagnosis is intended to identify and prevent its full onset. These developments provoke a series of questions whose reach extends beyond the expertise of mental health researchers. Has the behavior of American youth grown more irritable and defiant, or has the adult judgment of their behavior changed? How can we explain the variations in diagnoses around the globe, and across racial and class lines If there is a dramatic shift in youth behavior, what factors and dynamics might be precipitating these changes? How much risk should people tolerate to avoid potential outcomes? What is the relationship between contemporary media representations and madness? Are alternative explanations for purported shifts in the behavior of children and adolescents being adequately explored? How can we effectively study and explain these dramatic transformations in judgment and behavior? Whose voices and perspectives should be taken into account in deciding these questions?\
\
The research agenda I have outlined demands that we draw upon multidisciplinary approaches using a diversity of methods to effectively explore with these subjects. A comprehensive investigation of this agenda is beyond the scope of this chapter, or even a single dissertation. The abbreviated snapshot I present here is intended to illustrate how complex these issues are, and the ways they intersect across a range of methods and disciplines. The methodological approaches I outlined in the last chapter are suitable candidates for studying these issues, and a mixture of methods including scientific literature reviews, content analysis of media, supplemented by ethnographic studies of the relevant stakeholders are all invaluable ways of knowing that can provide a more holistic and complete grasp of these concerns.\
\
This chapter paints picture of the milieu that surrounds the ethnographic studies I conduct in the upcoming chapters three, four and five. These controversies set the stage for the lives of the activists and mental health professionals I interacted with. Stories like the ones I profile in this chapter are regularly passed around in mental health networks, among activists and professionals alike. In later chapters we will explore alterative explanations and narrations of these conditions neglected by most psychiatric researchers. To more fully appreciate these stakeholder's perspectives, it is essential to share this context.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}