{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Vibe Checkers and Knife Wielding Psychotics##\
\
Although the threat of violence and sexual harassment in the park was real and immanent, some of the Support group participants began to questions the group's incessant focus on violence in their orientations and role-plays. They argued that the constant focus in role-plays on scenarios like a confrontation with a "knife wielding psychotic" primed the community patrollers, and helped perpetuate an atmosphere of fear, control and anger among the support staff. The mailing list was filled with examples of people imagining and responding to negative situations, but the Support group was not focused on improving this atmosphere by introducing positive energy to the park. These black and white examples also obscured the complexities of the far more common grey zones, like eccentric and annoying behaviors.\
\
Countercultural events such as Rainbow Gatherings, Grateful Dead shows, and Burning Man feature "vibe checkers", or people responsible for helping to insure that nobody is having a "bad trip". Some of the radical mental health activists argued that the Support group's community patrols felt more like policing than vibe checkers. In recent years, there have been numerous incidents where law enforcement has overacted when confronting mentally ill suspects, often with fatal outcomes (Krameddine & Silverstone, 2015; Friedersdorf, 2015). The Support group's tactics were incomparable to law enforcement's, as the community patrols were unarmed, empathetic, and focused on verbal de-escalation. Nonetheless, the some of the group's trainings and role play scenarios emotionally triggered some Supporters who had been on the receiving end of these kinds of authoritative interventions in their past. They expressed their desire for more nuanced role-play scenarios, and felt the black and white portrayals reduced their experiences to caricatures, and fostered exaggerated responses.\
\
Being surveilled by the community patrols, a group that had begun to wield a distinct power within the community encampment, was a responsibility that most of the Support group lived up to. However, as conditions in Zuccotti continued to deteriorate as the weather became colder and people set up tents, the patrols became more vigilant. The tents meant more private space, and more opportunities for mischief and strife to flourish. Some of the patrols carried their stress with them, and in some circumstances may have helped reinforce an atmosphere of fear and anxiety.\
\
>Supporter10: "In terms of the incident last night with the young man with the broken leg. I'm pretty sure that I've witnessed the disagreements and conflicts that lead up to that situation\'85. [T]his stems from some bigger issues than just that someone is "mentally ill" or "aggressive" or violent. I'm not trying to excuse or justify violence. I know these young people really well and I absolutely want nothing more than for them to be able to be safe\'85. [A] lot of the violence that is happening in the park is not random or isolated or happening in a vacuum. To adequately address and prevent it, we're going to need responses and interventions that take a lot of systemic injustice and inequality into account. I'm not saying I have the answer, or that there even is an answer that can be written up in a 5-step guide and distributed to different working groups. I'm just saying that these are big issues, that go much beyond a mental health diagnosis or whether or not someone is using substances. (2011b)\
\
The incident that Supporter10 reports in this email, sent on November 14, the night before the police raid on Zuccotti park, captures the kinds of issues that Support grappled with in the latter days of the encampment. By this time, fatigue had set in, and the communication lines between Support members were fragmented. This incident Supporter10 writes about was not captured in the red log book, which was never consistently used, and the full background of this story was passed orally between Supporters directly involved in the intervention. Supporters who were not on-site that day relied on the mailing list for background information, and only received an incomplete account of the situation. Mailing list communications were often cryptic, in part because of the effort required to compose a complete story, and in part since participants did not completely trust everyone else on the list.\
\
I am unfamiliar with the full backstory behind this particular email, but I believe that it likely conveys a potent subtext, a communication sent to the wider list that was really intended for one or two specific individuals, the continuation of a conversation that began in person. Supporter10 was a social work student, studying community organizing, mediation, and de-escalation. His/her attempt to inject a consideration of the activist's history into their evaluation, and refutation of the group's ability to capture this approach in bullet points may have been a response to harsher proposals to eject the "troublemaker" from the park, and a critique of the effort to simplify the principles of mediation to a one-page flyer.\
\
Faced with this range of differing and irreconcilable perspectives, a few members of the Support group migrated to other groups that better matched their understanding of support, and the kinds of assistance they wanted to offer the movement. They shared with me how they felt marginalized within the Support group structure, systematically silenced and ignored during meetings, and wanted to participate in a group more aligned with their values. Despite all of these conflicts and critiques, the Support group performed remarkably well, providing essential support services throughout the occupation of Zuccotti park, and extending their services through the winter as Occupy was dispersed throughout the city into makeshift shelters. Some of the differences people expressed with the Support group were based more on personality and style, than on substantive ideological differences.\
\
One of Occupy's strengths was catalyzing encounters between diverse perspectives, in relative safety. I want to emphasize that with all of the disagreements, the members of the Support group were all dedicated and passionate activists with good hearts and the best of intensions. Some of the demands of the Radical Mental Health activists were overly unreasonable, impractical, and disconnected from the harsh realities of suffering and risk on the ground. Overall the Support group was effective and cohesive, sustaining an active presence in the park throughout the period of occupied encampment. Radical mental health activists would most likely welcome the mainstream adoption of the intervention models developed and practiced by the Occupy Support group. Within the context of Occupy, the radical mental health activists held the Support group to a higher standard, in an effort to advance the discourse by challenging assumptions, unsettling conventions and provoking debate.\
\
}