{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #Medical Authorities#\
\
The psychiatric-pharmaceutical establishment rarely acknowledges these challenges to their authority, but their messaging reinforces and relies on the validity of a form of scientific objectivity that can definitely distinguish between sickness and health. Mainstream patient literature often explains mental illness by drawing an analogy between mental illness and diabetes, or other chronic ailments that require medical intervention (National Alliance on Mental Illness, n.d.). This comparison once again advances the notion that patients are sick and there is no lasting cure---only chronic treatments of symptoms requiring lifelong medication, despite many of the documented health risks that psychiatric drugs introduce (Whitaker, 2010).\
\
The parameters of normal and illness are defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), a book published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) whose influence extends far beyond psychiatry, throughout medicine, therapeutic services, insurance claims and health policy. There are important differences between the diagnoses in the DSM and classic physiological illnesses. First and foremost, many of diagnoses in the DSM lack consensus on whether the conditions described are _illnesses_ deserving medical intervention or _behaviors_ that deviate from societal norms. Furthermore, psychological and emotional distress is incredibly complex and varied, and its causal roots are multivariate and remain shrouded in uncertainty. Many physiological disorders have clearly defined symptoms, whose underlying causes are theoretically grounded in well established models, and can be directly measured. Others, such as Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (Institute of Medicine., 2015), Irritable Bowel Syndrome (Ohman & Simr\'e9n, 2010) or Morgellons Syndrome (Pearson et al., 2012) currently defy simple explanation, and Western medicine struggles to treat. Psychiatry's approach towards mental distress more closely resembles the treatment of these poorly understood syndromes than the treatment of the well-defined illness of diabetes. We still don't understand enough about mental distress to compare it with confidence to anything other than another mystery.\
\
Diabetes is a metabolic disorder that is believed, with support from a variety of empirical observations, to be caused when the pancreas fails to create enough insulin to break down glucose, causing increased glucose levels in the blood (American Diabetes Association, n.d.). A network of beliefs and accompanying evidence has confirmed this interpretation of symptoms such as increased thirst, hunger, fatigue, blurred vision and headaches. Psychiatry, on the other hand, is still searching for a causal model, and the DSM's attempts to carve out analytic categories and constructs are regularly called into question. Some argue that many of the diagnoses in the DSM are actually "catch-all" categories. For example, the grab bag of symptoms associated with schizophrenic diagnoses arises from a variety of disparate causes, which may each benefit from differential treatments (Zimney, 2008). Despite investing hundreds of millions of dollars into decades of research, psychiatric researchers have yet to produce a test validating psychiatric diagnosis (Valenstein, 2002). In 2005 the president of the American Psychiatric Association, Steven Sharfstein, backpedaled on the profession's longstanding claim that mental illnesses are caused by chemical imbalances (Hickey, 2014) and admitted that "brain science has not advanced to the point where scientists or clinicians can point to readily discernible pathologic lesions or genetic abnormalities that in and of themselves serve as reliable or predictive biomarkers of a given mental disorder or mental disorders as a group" (American Psychiatric Association, 2003). The use of the term "readily discernible" hedges the profession's uncertainty about their lack of supporting evidence for the chemical imbalance hypothesis, without disavowing it entirely. As we shall see later, psychiatric researchers have begun to favor the language of "information processing errors" over "chemical imbalance", reflecting the dominant metaphor for understanding brain functions as computations (Rabinbach, 1990). Hickey later wrote that "[psychiatry] must examine the fact that as a profession, we have allowed the biopsychosocial model to become the bio-bio-bio model" (2005).\
\
The biomedical model of emotional distress attempts to definitively state the nature of this distress in objective terms. Many on the receiving end of these diagnoses feel that this claim of objectivity inhibits their ability to locate meaning in their condition by reducing it to a medical label. Despite the widespread claim that labels are purely instrumental, shorthand for doctors to communicate with each other, labels can deeply influence people's identities. Diagnostic labels make some people feel powerless and objectified, like they are "a mood disorder with legs" (Rosenthal, 2010a). There are always elements of a psychological state that cannot be captured by physiological measures. Diagnostic labels often ignore individual and intergenerational trauma, structural oppression and inequality, and a range of social, cultural, political, spiritual and psychological lenses for understanding complex conditions. Some people I met described feeling that labels striped them of their agency, absolving them of responsibility for behaviors associated with their condition, or dooming them to fulfill their diagnosis. The objective authority of labels also discourages people from exploring alternative explanations for their conditions. Language matters in defining the reality of subjective states, and is central in the formation of identity and meaning.\
\
Incorporating a range of diverse stakeholders in the production of psychiatric knowledge would help illuminate the narrowness of current assumptions and give voice to alternative ways to conceptualize and support existential diversity, suffering and crisis. This position does not amount to radical relativism, or endorse the idea that anything goes. Instead, it challenges monocultures of knowledge production and demands that diverse pluralities participate in the judgments that society enforces around values and norms. The systematic denial of the role of value judgments in the production of psychiatric knowledge needs to be interrogated and challenged. The pretense of atheoretical, "views from nowhere" needs to be exposed, laying bare its underlying biases and ideologies. To be sure, our capacity for reconciling difference is woefully lacking, but the precondition to begin this process starts with listening.}