{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Atypical Childhoods Lost##\
\
Challenging psychiatric methods and paradigms, questioning the validity of pharmaceutical research, and protesting the political processes of mental health policy, are nothing new. What is new here is the heightened focus on childhood behaviors and preemptive interventions. As a category, the diagnosis and treatment of children is a highly provocative topic. As with other human rights issues such as shoddy labor conditions, extreme poverty, disease and hunger, all suffering is deplorable; even more so when the sufferers are children. Children continue to be regarded as innocent, and without the ability to fully consent to treatments the moral responsibility for their well-being falls on their parents, doctors and teachers. Children can never truly grant consent around any form of treatment, and their power to consent is entrusted to their parents or guardians. Our collective projections of our own failures coupled with the opportunity to redeem the next generation raise the ante around these issues.\
\
Before presenting more facts and statistics about the rise of pediatric bipolar, I will introduce a few powerful anecdotes that vividly illustrate the human contours of this growing controversy. Consider the case of Rebecca Reily, a four-year-old girl in Boston who died on December 2006 after an overdose of the anti-psychotic _Seroquel_, administered by her parents (Creamer and Mishra, 2007; Couric, 2007). Her parents were both charged with murder and, at their trial, claimed they were following doctor's orders. They had obtained SSI benefits for the siblings and for themselves, to the tune of $30,000 per year, and were applying for Rebecca's benefits when she was killed. Her mother was found guilty of second-degree murder, and her father was convicted of first-degree murder, and both were sentenced to life in prison (Lambert, 2014). Rebecca's psychiatrist, Dr. Kayoko Kifuji, diagnosed her with attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder and bipolar disorder whens she was just _two and a half years old_, and prescribed a powerful cocktail of psychotropic medications. Dr. Kifuji's license was not suspended, although she voluntarily suspended her practice pending the resolution of the outstanding civil and criminal charges (Wen, 2009). Her hospital has issued the statement: "The care we provided was appropriate and within responsible professional standards" (Creamer and Mishra, 2007).\
\
Sadly, this case is not an isolated occurrence. Reports surfaced in 2006 about another three-year-old girl, Destiny Hager, who died in April 2006 of complications resulting from known side-effects of the antipsychotics _Seroquel_ and _Godeon_ (Carpenter, 2009). An autopsy of the 38-lb girl revealed "antipsychotic drugs present in concentrations considered therapeutic in adults" (Carpenter, 2009). Her psychiatrist, Vernon Kliewer, who had been practicing children's psychiatry for over fifty years, was investigated by the Kansas Board of healing arts for his treatment of Destiny and five other children aged two to five years old. Kliewer negotiated a settlement that didn't require him to admit any wrongdoing, and he has voluntarily stopped treating patients under age six (Carpenter, 2009).\
\
In January 2008, PBS Frontline aired an hour-long documentary called _The_ _Medicated_ _Child_, profiling the lives of three children diagnosed between four to six years old with bipolar disorder (Garviria, 2008). The children and their families were all struggling with devastating side-effects and complications, such as involuntary tics and spasms (_tardive dyskinesia_) and extreme weight gain, resulting from their treatment. The documentary argued that a massive public health experiment is currently being conducted on the nation's youth, without anyone's informed consent (Garviria, 2008). In one segment a mother was feeding her son corndogs, Gatorade, Goldfish crackers, and cookies, while she complained on-camera about his erratic hyperactive behavior. For decades studies have suggested links between junk food and hyperactivity in children, and evidence continues to accrue that artificial food coloring causes ADHD symptoms (Arnold, Lofthouse & Hurt, 2012). The filmmakers may have included this shot to call attention to the irony of the son's diet, his mother's complaints about his behavior and the neglect of his treatment team to explore these connections.\
\
In one segment, a psychiatrist goads a young girl into sharing her violent fantasies, though the doctor fails to explore the connections to her father's trauma as an Iraqi war veteran. In another, a mother makes an appointment to reduce her son's medications but is told by their psychiatrist that drugs are the only therapeutic option. She leaves the office with an additional prescription for Xanax to relieve her son's first-day-of-school anxiety.\
\
These anecdotes are not meant to imply that all children receiving diagnoses are grappling with superficial problems, or are being harshly punished for their misconduct. There are many reports of cases where children exhibit extremely violent and threatening patterns of behavior, including explosive rage, biting, punching, kicking and even knife wielding (Kluger & Song, 2002; Egan, 2008). Parents have banded together in online and in-person support groups, and report violent and aggressive behavior that includes violent threats, self-harm, and serious assaults (Papolos & Papolos, 2007). Some parents have exhausted alternatives to medication, feel genuinely threatened and unsafe, and are at a loss for how to help their children. However, these extreme cases mask the more common occurrence of the medicalization of misconduct and the role of drugs in punitive discipline.\
\
Just as drug companies popularized mild depression in Japan, childhood moodiness and irritability is being marketed as a medical condition. For the ordinary psychiatrist, school psychologist, social worker or foster parent in the field, the spectrum of symptoms is confusing, and the reliability of diagnoses is known to vary tremendously (Egan, 2008). In the course of my fieldwork, I met numerous people who felt they were wronged by psychiatry, their lives rendered miserable through side-effects and neglect. Many believe they are better off without psychiatric care, though many ambivalently continue to seek treatment, albiet at arm's length. Over my years of fieldwork, a disturbing trend I noticed was that people I met had entered the system at younger and younger ages. Many could not remember a time in their lives that they were drug-free.\
\
The atypical anti-psychotics prescribed for childhood bipolar are hardly innocuous. Common side-effects I have already mentioned include massive weight gain, metabolic disorders, diabetes, tardive dyskinesia. In November 2008 _The Wall Street Journal_'s health blog reported on a class action lawsuit brought against Jansen (owned by Johnson & Johnson) for the side-effects of their antipsychotic _Risperdal_ causing _gynecomcastia_, or male breast growth, in ten young boys (Mundy, 2008; Couric, 2009). Boys ranging from four to fourteen years old have been prescribed _Risperdal_ for ADHD and bipolar disorder, and have developed female breasts that can only be treated with mastectomies.\
\
These stories are horrifying, but they are not exceptions. In 2007 in Florida 23 infants under 1 years old were prescribed antipsychotics, prompting a perfunctory review process for all Medicaid prescriptions of antipsychotics to children under six (Hundley, 2009). Between 1994-2003 the diagnosis of bipolar in American children and adolescents has jumped 40-fold, or 4000 percent (Carey, 2007; Moreno, Laje, Blanco, Jiang, Schmidt, & Olfson., 2007). This statistic is somewhat misleading since the absolute number of children, ages 0-20 receiving this diagnosis in 1994 was small (25 out of 100,000, or about 16,000), but the rate of increase was enormous (jumping to 1003 out of 100,000, or about 725,000) (The United States Census Bureau, n.d.). The authors of this study based their estimates on a statistically meaningful sample (N=962) of the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. They lament that "[t]here is currently a dearth of information concerning national trends in the diagnosis of bipolar disorder among children and adolescents and the treatments that these young people receive."\
\
Since then, estimates of children's diagnoses have proven more challenging to discover, as researchers have begun tracking atypical-antipsychotics, prescribed for any indication, including ADHD, autism, bipolar, oppositional defiance disorder, and the newly coined Temper Dysregulation Disorder. The Medco report on _America's State of Mind_ (2011) states that the number of 10-19 year olds prescribed anti-psychotics is now around 1% (or about 420,000 teens), double the number from a decade earlier (The United States Census Bureau, n.d.).\
\
In an opinion piece published in the journal of _Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health,_ Gabrielle Carlson attributes this surge in diagnoses to the increased coverage in the mainstream media. She cites books such as the bestselling The Bipolar Child (Papolos & Papolos, 2000), which is now in its third edition and has sold over 200,000 copies, according to Amazon. The author's web site, bipolarchild.com, publishes a newsletter, sells accompanying DVDs and invites visitors to request consultations and referrals. Both Carlson and the authors of the 2007 study credit the 2002 Time magazine cover feature on "Young and Bipolar" (Kluger & Song, 2002) for a surge in public awareness. Finally, the authors of the 2007 study cite a 2003 _CBS Evening News_ broadcast that profiled a child misdiagnosed with ADHD, whose situation greatly improved when he received his bipolar diagnosis, and switched from taking Adderall to Lithium (Holguin). These authors do not offer any specific evidence that this media coverage caused the surge in diagnoses, but they do report anecdotal evidence of parents citing these media sources, and others like them, when visiting psychiatrists and primary care physicians.\
\
Psychologists such as Ross Green, author of _The Explosive Child_ (2007) and Mary Kurcinka, author of _Raising Your Spirited Child_ (1998) advocate for dealing with childhood misconduct by introducing alternative language, mediation styles and parenting techniques. Alternative explanations for irritability in children abound, as studies have shown that improved nutrition can reduce violence and behavioral unrest in prisons and schools (Laurance, 2008), and research demonstrates that sleep deprivation leads to hyperactivity and irritability (Brody, 2007). They do not rule out the use of pharmaceutical treatments, but believe they are being over prescribed, and are only one piece of a larger puzzle. Ultimately, no one really has a simple solution dealing with these troubled youth, and each case presents unique difficulties and challenges.\
\
As Mary Kurchinka explains in _Raising your Spirited Child_, language and labels are extremely powerful (Kurcinka, 1998). We always have a choice to describe identical behaviors with words that carry different connotations. Are children acting: explosive/spirited, demanding/high standards, unpredictable/flexible, loud/enthusiastic, argumentative/opinionated, stubborn/assertive, nosy/curious, wild/energetic, manipulative/charismatic, impatient/compelling, anxious/cautious, explosive/dramatic, picky/selective, distractible/perceptive (Kurcinka,1998)? These simple descriptive choices construct and perpetuate vastly different worlds. They communicate expectations as well as reinforce condemnation or support.\
\
According to Lloyd deMause, a prominent psychoanalyst and historian of childhood, child abuse extends deeply and broadly throughout human histories and cultures, and is far more widespread than most of us are prepared to admit (DeMause, 1982). The notion that parents and teachers are receiving a blessing from medical authorities to "shut their kids up" is an important concern not to be dismissed out of hand. Similarly, structural biases such as racism, classism and oppression continue to correlate strongly with treatment practices and outcomes (Link & Phelan, 1995; Metzl, 2010, 2014; Linares, 2013).\
\
}