{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \\chapter\{
\fs24 APA 2012:  Oppositionally Defiant Protestors
\fs28 \}\\label\{chapter-four\}\
\
\\cleanchapterquote\{The most intense conflicts, if overcome, leave behind a sense of security and calm that is not easily disturbed. It is just these intense conflicts and their conflagration which are needed to produce valuable and lasting results.\}\{
\fs24 Carl Jung
\fs28 \}\{Collected Works\} \
\
On May 5, 2012 over 10,000 members of the American Psychiatric Association converged on Philadelphia's Convention Center for their annual meeting (Burling, 2012). The official theme for 2012's annual conference was "integrated care", but the unofficial theme dominating the conference presentations and media coverage was the formal unveiling of the DSM-5 draft. Since the publication of the first edition of the manual in 1952 (American Psychiatric Association), the DSM has been the subject of perpetual controversy, and the DSM-5 in particular has generated more debate than any of versions preceding it. Alongside the regular attendees, journalists flocked to the APA to cover this event, and mental health activists descended to express their dissatisfaction and outrage.\
\
I traveled to Philadelphia to participate in the protests and observe the protesters' presentations. I also spent a full day attending the APA conference, listened to a few talks, visited the poster sessions, and explored the exhibition hall. I engaged in many conversations with protestors, journalists, researchers and psychiatrists about the DSM, focusing on the most controversial diagnoses like pediatric bipolar and psychotic risk syndrome. I left Philadelphia with a newfound appreciation for the immense scale of the system the protesters were struggling against, and a fresh perspective for how many psychiatrists were also critical of the psychiatric-pharmaceutical complex.\
\
I also witnessed confirmation of this dissertation's central contentions. First, there was an evident contrast between the established anti-psychiatry/psychiatric survivor movements and a new wave of mad activists. The contrast was at times subtle, as some activists with a history of advocating in a more traditional, dogmatic style had refreshed their rhetoric and nuanced their message to be more inclusive. At other times the contrast was quite stark. There were few sparks of contention between these two camps since their strategic interests intersected, however, their differences surfaced in their tactical priorities and were visible when their messages collided.\
\
Second, the urgency of advocating for patient empowerment and a stronger voice in the co-construction of psychiatric knowledge was clearly visible in a dramatic meeting which included the protesters and a group of psychiatrists who self-identified as the "Radical Caucus". In the last chapter we witnessed how difficult it was for those without professional mental health credentials to assert their voices and be heard by mental health professionals. The mental health professionals organizing in Zuccotti Park are among the most progressive and liberal mental health professionals practicing in New York. Similarly, the psychiatrists who are members of the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) Radical Caucus self-identify as radical and, along with a few other groups (e.g. The International Society for Ethical Psychology & Psychiatry (ISEPP) and American Association of Community Psychiatry (AACP)), are ostensibly the most vocal critics of the psychiatry from within the US establishment. These groups are most likely to be receptive to the needs and concerns of the protestors, and their negative reactions suggest how difficult it is for mad activists to find mainstream allies. Both in the Occupy Support group and the APA Radical Caucus the voices and concerns of the patients, peers, and non-credentialed advocates were systematically stifled and marginalized. If these actors are treated this way within sympathetic circles of allies, it is disconcerting to extrapolate the attitude of the mainstream psychiatric establishment.\
}