{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##The Problems in \\'the\\' Movement##\
\
In May 2013, Nev Jones, a doctoral candidate in community psychology, published a blog post on the problems inside the mad movement. (Jones, 2013) This post generated a great deal of debate across the c/s/x movement, and the Icarus Facebook group alone generated hundreds of responses to this post. Threads of this length and intensity are a regular occurrence within the Icarus forums and Facebook group, and I have selected to analyze this exchange since it does not involve anyone's personal condition and also does and excellent job surfacing some of the core issues the project is currently negotiating. The thread is representative of the tone and style of exchange across a wide range of issues, and my inclusion of this debate provides a sampling of the texture of these conversations.\
\
The post critiqued the larger mad movement's leadership, organizational structure and contradictory politics. Jones begins:\
\
>[I do not know of] one national user/survivor organization... with a transparent, robustly democratic organizational structure: at the extremes, some organizations that (explicitly or implicitly) claim to 'represent' a national constituency do not even publicly list the names of their leaders, administrators or board members. There are no elections, and sometimes absolutely no way for 'outsiders' to get involved even as volunteers. Little or no attention is paid to widespread geopolitical disparities, to the de facto silencing of service user voices in huge swathes of the country, or to the trickle-down effects of SAMSHA [the federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration] funding (or the lack thereof) [the bulk of SAMSHA's funding is administered through block grants, which are in turn, dispensed by individual States], which remains largely contingent on the presence of "statewide" consumer networks which many states do not have in place (no matter how dense or active the smaller groups within these states).\
\
>A handful of SAMSHA Technical Assistance Centers exercise more or less exclusive control over the only "national" US c/s/x conference (Alternatives), and other 'events' and gatherings are by and large 'by invitation only,' further consolidating the power of small and select 'insider' networks."\
\
>A curious combination of anti-intellectualism and anti-empiricism seems to fuel such 'lines of flight'; apparent, for example, in the simultaneous valorization of 'good' science (viz. "science" that matches particular ideological positions regardless of the methods employed) and disregard for the transdisciplinary cultural and political complexities of all knowledge production and dissemination. If financial 'conflicts of interest' are an issue in the world of Big Pharma, they are no less an issue (albeit on a vastly smaller scale) in the increasingly commodified world of training packages and patented interventions (e.g. OpenDialogue [an alternative, dialogue-based approach to psychosis interventions, developed in Finland (Intervoice, 2013)]). (Jones, 2013)\
\
Some of the initial, knee-jerk reactions to the post were defensive, and some attacked Jones for her jargon-filled academic language and simplified her position as an anti-anti-psychiatrist and sympathizer with the biomedical model.\
\
>Icarista01:I don't see this author's appraisal existing within that "grey zone" of auto-critique and meaningful dialogue that they praise. Their own biases and unquestioned assumptions are clear as day in this piece. For example, in this quote: "truly "chronic" problems are either explained away as casualties not of madness but rather overmedication and iatrogenic trauma" they frame the biopsych perspective as absolute fact ("truly") and the antipysch perspective as simply dodging those facts ("explained away"). Throughout the piece they slap a "problematic" label on various things with little explanation or attempt to back it up. This piece lacks substance and just looks to me like the tl;dr [too long, don't read] version of an "amirite, guys?" to the consumer crowd. I have frequently seen (and see reflected in this piece) a sense of entitlement coming from those whose belief system is more closely aligned with the mainstream --- a smug belief that their perspective is the gold standard of uncontestable fact, that the burden of proof rests on anyone deviating from such, and that no perspective can be "nuanced" or "complex" unless it includes or validates theirs in some way.\
\
As the thread progressed, some others urged a closer reading, especially after people discovered Jones' personal identification as a mad activist and voice hearer with a schizophrenic diagnosis.\
\
>Icarista02: I'm going to do my best to say a few things about this in a non-polarizing way, cause these comment threads too often lead to that. First, I basically agree completely with the blog post, however I do not agree with how it is framed in some of the above responses. The post is not pro-Pharma, nor is it coming from a 'consumer' as apposed to a 'radical' perspective. In fact, part of the point of the post is to reject that dichotomy. There are not 2 or 3 perspectives in "c/s/x" or "mad" or "radical mental health activism," there are many. In the case of the blog, I would suggest considering the source-a completely credible radical mental health activist and researcher with (also credible) lived experience of madness and the system. I would also suggest considering the audience. That is, 'us.' People involved in 'radical' mental health activism. She is objecting to within movement issues, and they are quite serious concerns, ones related to things that I would hope any 'radical' identified person would be open to hearing: silencing dissent, appropriation of mad identities for profit, consolidation of power, representing marginalized others from a place of privilege while discrediting their experience, etc. I would say the Icarus Project, if it's anything like it used to be, would be right on board with this. After all, Icarus was 'grey' back in the day.\
\
Throughout the thread Icarista02 patiently tried to explain Jones' position against an initially stark rejection. However, even Jones' invocation of personal stories within the movement was criticized on the grounds that she mobilized these stories for a utilitarian purpose:\
\
>Icarista03: I very much enjoy hearing people's personally stories, whatever shape their stories has. But I like it as long as it is deeply human, as me, human, getting to know another human. I don't like to listen to listen to personal stories as some sort of utilitarian or intellectual exercise to achieve conclusions that are outside the person, to analyze the person in ways that i think will ultimate benefit/validate or agree with me. I find it very dehumanizing and degrading. I enjoy intellectualism, but certainly not that flavor of it. I also find disagreement to be a beautiful thing, because disagreement births multiple ideas and multiple places where a variety of people can find 'home' or 'help' or whatever it is they are looking for, so I don't necessarily think that should be the end goal of conversations or practices.\
\
The debate over the connotations of "chronic" conditions continued:\
\
>Icarista01:to respond to your comments to me from earlier: I think you missed my point. "Truly chronic" is a de facto endorsement of biopsychiatry because it implies a permanent biological disorder. You're doing the same thing Nev [Jones] did, basically stating this as an absolute fact of reality when really you have no way of knowing that --- not for yourself, not for your mother, not for anyone.\
\
>Icarista02: I truly apologize if my careless use of language caused offense. This format is an inherently dehumanizing way to communicate. this was not my intention.As to 'chronicity,' I think it's not in touch with the reality of many peoples lives to not acknowledge that these difficulties are inherently a part of the person, biological or otherwise. As to disorder, that is socially defined. We acknowledge eye color is genetic, but not a disorder.\
\
>Icarista04: damn this is a debate. really appreciating everyone's comments. I really disagree with this statement: " "Truly chronic" is a de facto endorsement of biopsychiatry because it implies a permanent biological disorder." I do not think that saying someone's distress recurs means it is in any way inherently biological, or a disorder. My distress has certainly turned out to be chronic, no matter how many non-pharmaceutical treatment alternatives or lifestyle changes I have made. (And I have tried SO MANY.) It comes back and comes back and comes back, in small micro-storms I can navigate, and in huge episodes that wreck my entire life. I don't think that means I have a biological disorder, but I do not identify with all the linear recovery stories, the narratives that say it is all caused by psychiatry or all caused by the meds, or with the political rhetoric that minimizes actual experiences of madness. I do not feel like my experience is at all included in the narratives so popular right now on places like Mad in America and Madness Radio that so often focus only on recovery from first break "psychosis" or single episode depression, that therefore debunk research only specifically around anti-psychotics and anti-depressants, etc, but don't look at things on the bipolar spectrum. It's so much more complicated when your shit recurs over and over, and when in your experience mood stabilizers help and prevent crises and are not a fucking placebo - but when you go look at media produced by some of the top movement critics - Peter Breggin's [a staunch anti-psychiatrist] toxic psychiatry website, for example, there's nothing on mood-stabilizers and anti-convulsants. Clink on those links and they're empty. Bob Whitaker doesn't write about them either.\
\
The chorus of support continued to gain volume:\
\
>Icarista04: Once I felt like I was duped by psychiatry because I listened to anti-psychiatry. Then I felt like I was duped by anti-psychiatry... Now I don't listen to any extreme, but the shame never goes away... I'm a survivor of the system and of mental illness too... I had periods where I've been jobless, friendless, no support from family, homeless, hungry, tortured and really fucking crazy to the point of putting myself and others in danger... On medication I'm at least stable enough to not be constantly tormented inside... Do the medications have dangers?... Pharma would have me believe those dangers are nothing and anti-pharma would have me believe my head's going to explode tomorrow. I'm right now making an informed choice to be on medication... That's based on my past actual states of mind and behavior (and the police arriving at the right time), not just conjecture... From my perspective, both "sides" of this thing are doing it wrong and both have considerable persuasive power in their own way.\
\
But these arguments would never convince the die-hard psychiatric survivors in the group, who continued to stick to their dogma:\
\
>Icarista05: "Mental illness does not exist" is not a line, it is not a move in a parlor game to be played by postmodern intellectuals. It reflects an existential position about what it means to be a human being. After a few years of working in the mental death system I realized\'96I was too stupid to see sooner\'96 that the mental illness attribution was the most powerful way to invalidate people as human beings. Anyone who was once ever a patient (as I was\'96in therapy) ought to know that.. You've convinced yourself now it's just "a line." Did you forget how important it once was to you to be taken as seriously as everyone else, how discrediting it was to be dismissed as schizophrenic or bipolar or whatever?\
\
Discussions like this are typical within the Icarus community, and diverse and contradictory views are cultivated and developed. This thread never came to a resolution, although the insight around the prevalent "first break" narrative would resurface in later conversations. Contradiction, reflection and critique are the norm as diverse beliefs clash and coalesce. Sometimes people's positions soften and change. Other times they remain steadfast and resolute. What is most notable is that a space has been cleared that is tolerant of differing positions where people are generally respectful to each other, with some exceptions. They are committed to listening to and learning from each other's wisdom, especially when it was gleaned through personal lived experience. These conversations are often highlighted and synthesized in the group's publications, which are published in the form of newsletters, articles and zines.\
\
}